and

DR. RASHID ALLEEM

Fostering
Creativity
and

Innovation
Dr. Rashid Alleem

Fostering Creativity & Innovation
Alleem Research & Development Center
Email : alleembooks@alleem.com
P.O. Box 1610, Sharjah UAE
Copyright © Dr. Rashid Alleem 2020. All rights reserved. The right of
Dr. Rashid Alleem to be identified as the Author of this Work.
ISBN : 978-1-9163363-4-6
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated
without the publisher’s prior written consent in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar
condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent
purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright reserved
above. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in, or
introduced into a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means (electronics, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise) without the prior written permission of both the copyright
owner and the above-mentioned publisher of this book. Any person or
company who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.

Knowledge Partner		
ALLEEM

SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT

GOALS
alleembooks.com
alleembooks

Supported by		

ALSO BY THE AUTHOR
The SEWA Way
Is Success a Sin?
I Am Committed
Quality Education
Inspirational Stories
New Year Resolutions
My Leadership Secrets
Successful Marketing Plan
The SEWA Marketing Plan
My Green Journey in Hamriyah
Tolerance - Harmony in Difference
The SEWA Customer-Centric Model
The SEWA Project Management Model
Alleem Sustainable Development Goals
The 13 Critical Traits of Team Dynamics
SEWA Brand Turnaround & Rejuvenation
Sustainability: The Fourth Wave of Economy
For more information about the above books, contact:

alleembooks@alleem.com
alleembooks.com

Praise for

Fostering
Creativity
and

Innovation
This is the first challenge in the world to progressively and
comprehensively address the fundamental importance of
productivity and sustainable-growth-ability in terms of creativity and innovation. It implies that the UAE stands for
“Uncompromisingly” developing with “Advanced-ideas”
in “Entrepreneurship manner”.
Dr. Akima Umezawa
Consul-General of Japan in Dubai
Enjoyed reading the Creativity and Innovation goal. Very
well-articulated and indeed it is need of the hour. Readers
can hugely benefit from understanding the various spheres
and how we can vision ourselves and recognize those innovation blind spots around us. Truly, our young talent is well
showcased but also the book talks about the various inno-

vation initiatives from which each one of can benefit and
carry forward our innovation dream and keep entrepreneurial spirit live to combat the future challenges. A must
read for all to envisage innovation future!
Dr Flevy Lasrado
Discipline Leader
University of Wollongong in Dubai, UAE

In our fast-paced world, technology is constantly changing
and the business world evolving. Embracing innovation as
a culture isn’t an extra step to get ahead; it’s a necessity for
keeping up. We need to be productively restless; to keep
our eyes constantly turned towards the future.
The book, with its practical approach, showcasing a number of case studies, and real stories of role models who
embraced an innovative mindset to change the world,
constitutes a road map to individuals and organizations,
it confirmed what I always advocate for as an innovation
is not a single shot of inspiration or a motivational slogan
to sling around the office, but a culture to foster and grow.
Hanane Benkhallouk
Innovation Strategist
Executive Director, Sustain Leadership Consultancy, UAE

Dedicated to my beloved son Obaied.
I love you more than you will ever know.
Keep dreaming BIG!

6

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

CONTENTS

Foreword 						
Introduction 						

i
iii

CHAPTER 1: CREATIVITY				1
		
2
		1 What is Creativity?			
		2 Train Your Brain			

6

		3 Your Brain on Creativity		 9
		4 I was Here				10
		5 The Being Creative Room		

12

		6 Creativity & Artificial Intelligence

15

		7 Creativity & Passion			

17

		8 Creativity is Connecting Things		

21

		9 What If				24
		10 Analogy Thinking			

26

		11 Divergent Thinking			

30

		12 Convergent Thinking			

33

		13 Disruptive Innovation		

36

CHAPTER 2: INNOVATION

		39
		
		1 What is Innovation?			40
		2 Shape a New Future			

42

		3 Incremental Innovation		

45

		4 Radical Innovation			

48

7

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

CHAPTER 3: THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
		
CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

51

		
		1 The Difference Between
		

Creativity & Innovation		

52

		2 World Creativity & Innovation Day

58

CHAPTER 4: UAE NATIONAL
		INNOVATION STRATEGY		

61

		1 UAE National Innovation Strategy

62

		2 UAE Innovation Month			

65

		3 Takamul				

67

		

		4 Mohammed Bin Rashid
		

Innovation Fund			

69

		5 Innovation in Education		

71

		6 UAE’s Most Recognized Child Inventor 73
		7 First Emirati Female Inventor		

75

		8 The First Emirati to Become a
		

Theoretical Physicist 			

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

		

77

79

ALLEEM 21 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

80

ABOUT THE AUTHOR		

89

8

FOREWORD
There is perhaps no better time than what we are going
through for a book on creativity and innovation. The global experience of the pandemic calls into question the models and certainties of our social organizations and economic
systems and therefore questions our ability to imagine, introduce and manage change.
At the same time, Dr. Rashid Alleem’s book is a tribute to the
spirit of the United Arab Emirates and to that constant and
genuine tension of the leadership and of the whole society of
this young country towards the future, without fear of questioning consolidated schemes or of setting ambitious goals.
What other country, after all, has a space program that plans
to establish the first human settlement on Mars in 2117 (after
launching the first probe towards the Red Planet in the last
weeks)?
Creativity, as the author teaches, is unprecedented perception, intuition, original thought in all its forms; different from
a flash or an isolated point, it is also part of a defining process,
the analysis and synthesis of things. Inseparable from the
impetus, creativity pushes to intervene effectively on reality
without being afraid of the associated risk. However, creativity is not enough on its own: alongside purpose and commitment, the executive moment cannot indeed be missing,
supported by persevering will, research and organization.
Therefore, creativity and innovation, marks of the future, are
constantly reminiscent of each other, and to cultivate one is
to empower the other whether it is art, design or any kind of
entrepreneurial endeavor.

i

In this inseparable pair, creativity is a priority; it is guide and
lifeblood to the innovative solution. For this reason, Fostering Creativity and Innovation insists on it in a special way by
pointing out the need for a real culture of creativity, an educational path that accompanies the individual in the rediscovery of childhood personality, of play and joy, of curiosity and
exploration, and of imagination, independent and free.
However, there is another aspect that the author stresses
and that I find crucial: the link between the process of creation-innovation and connection, which is the essence of our
humanity as intelligent creatures (intelligence means precisely “ability to connect”). Connection between things, between
concepts, between areas of knowledge, as a genius like Leonardo da Vinci, quoted by the author, shows; but also among
individuals, people and cultures. Connection, I add, that requires physical interaction, sharing of spaces and sensory experiences, which technology can temporarily make up for (as
we see in these times of physical distancing), but which it can
never replace with virtual relationships.
If it is true, therefore, that without creation there is no innovation; it is also true that without connection there is no
creation. And when the world meets in the UAE next year
for EXPO2020 Dubai, which will probably be the first global
event after the pandemic, the theme “Connecting minds, creating the future” will prove to be the most appropriate one.

Nicola Lener
Ambassador of Italy to the UAE

ii

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this book

“Innovation is no longer an
option—it’s the gateway of
success in today’s business
world.”
								
					- Dr. Rashid Alleem

iii

WELCOME!
I strongly believe that if you are reading this book you have the
honor and the obligation to tackle one of the gravest needs of
the 21st century: Fostering creativity and innovation. Edward
de Bono, a psychologist from Oxford University, said: “There
is no doubt that creativity is the most important human resource of all. Without creativity, there would be no progress, and we would be forever repeating the same patterns.”
This is the central focus of this book.

ANOTHER BOOK ABOUT CREATIVITY AND
INNOVATION?
You may ask, Why this book? Thousands of books were written on the topic and more will be published this year. Why
add one more to an already crowded shelf?
Permit me to give you a little background.
Let’s go back to June 2019 to a lovely team dinner in Dubai.
Throughout the evening, we had a lively discussion about the
Alleem 21 sustainable development goals and the importance
of them in today’s world. Our conversation centered on the
list’s second goal, Fostering Creativity and Innovation, and a
debate ensued around the importance of thinking big espe-

iv

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

cially as the whole world is running at a breakneck speed. As
soon as a got home I decided to write this book. The book not
only includes heartwarming stories and motivational sayings
about creativity and innovation, but also shows that we are all
capable of making the world a better place on a massive scale.
There is no better time then now to work together toward a
bright future for all, despite our differences!
This book will inspire you to dream big. Though I trust you
will find this book inspirational, motivational, and practical,
it is not a ‘how-to’ book. This book is for anyone in any organization, from the CEO to young managers, who is responsible
for addressing and solving creative business challenges and
looking for innovative solutions to make a better tomorrow.
That may be what attracted you to this book! I strongly believe that if you are reading this book you will learn what it
takes to drive innovation and lead organizational change.
So welcome to the world of creativity and innovation. Knowing the value of your time, I have tried my best to be precise
and keep the chatter to a minimum. I am confident you will
discover original and practical new valuable creative thinking
tools and techniques you can use. More important, though, I
hope certain ideas leap out at you. Work with those ideas first.
Another piece of advice on how to leverage the knowledge
and the wisdom in this book to full advantage: Feel the words
as you read them, dog-ear the pages, and highlight as you go.
Make notes along the way on what interests you the most, and
how you might apply it and share it.
At the end of each chapter, stop to think about a key insight
you gained and how it can help you to create a more innovative organization. I like what Gary Hamel said, “You can buy

v

INTRODUCTION

knowledge by the yard today, but insight is still quite rare.” If
you find valuable insight in this book, then I have achieved
my goal in writing it.
I’m delighted to see this book reach leaders everywhere
through the free download at alleem.com
Wishing you the best!

Respectfully,
Rashid Alleem
Sharjah, UAE
February 29, 2020

vi

1

CREATIVITY

“One’s mind, once
stretched by a new
idea, never regains its
original dimensions.”
- Oliver Wendell Holmes

1

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

1
CREATIVITY

In today’s knowledge economy, creativity is our competitive
edge. It is more important than ever and has moved from a
‘nice to have,’ to a ‘need to have.’ But many organizations seem
to believe that creativity belongs just in sales, marketing, and
R&D. But creativity can benefit every function of an organization and influence the way business gets done for the better.
To get there, managers will first have to change their thinking
to approach the changing complexity of the business world
and the need to embrace creativity to make wiser decisions.
Most of the ways we were taught to think, to reason simply
don’t give us means to make wise decisions any more.
Organizations need creativity not just as an occasional exercise but as the heart of their business.
You may ask, creativity for what? By whom? How to achieve
it? What is creativity anyway? Let’s dig in.

WHAT IS CREATIVITY?
The dictionary defines creativity as “the ability to make or
otherwise bring into existence something new, whether a
new solution to a problem, a new method or device, or a new
artistic object or form.” In their book Corporate Creativity,
Alan G. Robinson and Sam Stern define corporate creativity

2

WHAT IS CREATIVITY

as such: “A company is creative when its employees do something new and potentially useful without being directly show
or taught.”
So corporate creativity is the use of imagination or original
ideas to create something new. It is characterized by the ability to perceive the world in new ways; do something unpredictable, original, and unique; and find a fresh perspective or
thought on the status quo. The created item can be anything;
it can be intangible (such as an idea, a scientific theory, a musical composition, or a joke!) or a physical object (such as an
invention, a literary work, or a painting).
Creativity is the ability
to reimagine existing
elements in new way.

According to Cornell Professor Robert Sternberg, “Creativity
is the production of something original and worthwhile.” My
favorite definition of creativity comes from author Rollo May,
who described it as “the process of bringing something new
into being.” He says, “Creativity requires passion, purpose,
and commitment. It brings to our awareness what was previously hidden and points to new life.”

EVERYONE IS GIFTED
At times, I ponder, are we born creative or made creative?
What is so fantastic about being creative? Are we creative by
choice or by chance? Creativity is definitely that extra factor

3

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

that adds a spark to your persona and distinguishes you from
the rest. It could be the way you talk, the way you dress, the
way you cook, or the way you perceive any situation in life.
Simply put: I believe everyone is creative and gifted. We’re
all born with immense natural talents, but by the time we’ve
been through schools and education too many of us have lost
touch with them. What happened? Often, suppressive forces
directed our thinking toward mediocre levels. You may have
heard, “You need a more practical dream” or that your ideas
were “stupid, naïve, or foolish.” It is your environment that
either helps creativity proliferate or nips it in the bud. The
world is jam-packed with people who would raise eyebrows
at your creative endeavor, but there are plenty who see the
value of creativity, too. So stop your negative self-talk and
saying, I’m not an ideas person. Everyone has ideas, and everyone is creative.

JUST START ACTING CREATIVE
If you want to become more creative, start acting like you are
creative. Suppose that you wanted to be an artist: You would
begin by doing what artists do, like paint every day. You may
not become another Vincent Van Gogh, but you’ll be more
of an artist than someone who has never tried. Similarly, to
increase your creativity, you need to make it a daily habit.
Try the following creative-thinking habits:
• Brainstorm lots of ideas—the more the better!
• Consistently challenge assumptions.
• Record your ideas and the ideas of others in a notebook.

4

WHAT IS CREATIVITY

• Learn from your failures and the failures of others.
• Constantly look for ways to improve your ideas and
products and the ideas and products of others.
You may not become the next Thomas Edison, but you’ll become much more creative than someone who has never tried.
The point is that the key is to focus on perception—new ideas
come when we perceive things differently.

5

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

2
TRAIN YOUR BRAIN

As a speaker, audiences often ask me: “Can creativity be
taught?” “Can you get your creative juices flowing?” “Is creative genius is reserved for chosen few?” “Where do I begin
my creativity journey?” The truth is, break–through creativity is in all of us. Human brains don’t come with a manual.
We are not computers with downloadable options. And we
receive only limited instruction throughout our education.
Over time we developed the mental software programs needed for logic, reason, and memory. There is no known way to
generate creative genius, or get people to produce groundbreaking ideas. Yet, it is possible to teach different types of
thinking. We are all creative and with the use of a few simple
tools, we can all become even more creative. It is us. Creativity is everywhere and in everyone who has the courage to tap
into his or her full potential.
The brain is the largest and most complex mass of nerve tissue
in the human body. It is an amazing mechanism. It receives
and analyzes messages from internal organs and from your external environment. The brain is so incredible and mystifying
and our understanding so limited that we’ve barely scratched
the surface of what it’s capable of! Neuroscience shows that
our brains are “plastic,” which means they are capable of being
reshaped, even in adulthood. Impressive, isn’t it?

6

TRAIN YOUR BRAIN

Just like working out at a gym helps us become more physically fit, exercising our brains can improve our mental performance and help you become the best version of yourself.
Just like a gym-training program, overnight results are not
possible.
According to the latest neuroscience studies, novelty comes
when we perceive things differently. Interestingly, the human
mind has an innate tendency to slip into routine shortcuts so
bombarding new perceptions or recalibrating our brain requires effort and soaks up a lot of energy. Have you not felt
completely mentally drained when you try to be creative or
innovate a bit? Certainly, yes.
It’s worth it to stick with it. Continuous training improves
performance on thinking, and some training programs are
more effective than others. Universities and colleges around
the world have a lot of good programs about the subject. It’s
also worth noting that there are self-help books, articles, and
online seminars that provide information, tips, techniques,
and access to creativity. You need to discover the one that’s
most effective for you. Once you’ve completed the right creative thinking training program, you’ll find thinking habits
will come more naturally to you.
“You can’t use up creativity.
The more you use,
the more you have.”
Maya Angelou

7

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

So never dream creativity as something separate from us.
Creativity is us. Yet, be careful. Remember, this is a process.
It’s not easy or straight forward because, after all, creativity
is not an end product. It needs direction from you. It needs
energy and time. And this is what you are going to discover in
this book. The book provides frameworks, advice, and tools
you need to excel in your career. With real-life stories and
best practices from ambitious professionals and leaders you
will stand out from the crowd regardless of your leadership /
management level or role.

8

YOUR BRAIN ON CREATIVITY

3
YOUR BRAIN ON CREATIVITY

While doing my research on creativity and innovation, I read
the great article “Your Brain on Creativity” by Grant Hilary
Brenner, a New York-based psychiatrist and an expert on
mental health, relationships, and self-care and wellness. The
article was published in Psychology Today in February 2018. I
would like to share part of that article with my dear readers:.
“Creativity is amazing. Play is amazing. Being original is
amazing. Amazing, astounding, thrilling, asymptotic. Divergence opens up possibilities, creating the flexibility to be extraordinary, to stand out from the crowd and enliven others
with a spellbinding display of wit and artistry. When attuned
to the environment, when humor is working well and the
timing is right, the ideas flow… with art which speaks to the
zeitgeist, capturing the ineffable in an ineffable way… creativity leads to deep communion and empathy.

9

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

4
I WAS HERE

Anaïs Nin once said, “We don’t see things as they are, we see
them as we are.” This quote will forever be true to me. During
my recent visit to Singapore, I was invited to visit the National
University of Singapore (NUS) where I had a chance to visit
the University Cultural Center.
I WAS HERE is a big sculpture, which beautifies the entrance
of the NUS museum where I discovered four collections and
more than 8,000 artifacts and artworks of ancient Chinese
materials, Indian classical sculptures, modern and contemporary Chinese, Southeast Asian, and Singaporean art. The
NUS Museum also serves as a vital curricular resource, providing an exciting learning experience for students.
While touring the museum, I thought about how the artifacts and artworks of ancient times were so uniquely made
and about how creativity and innovation are linked together.
I then read this beautiful statement in the museum’s newsletter: “Art encourages creative thinking and lets you come
up with your own unique solutions. Unlike, math, there is
no one correct answer in art! Out-of-the-box thinking also
stimulates your brain.”
To me, it all seemed to boil down to this: Highly creative
thinkers have the ability to see the connections that lead to

10

I WAS HERE

unexpected and original products and creativity is the ability
to bring new and valuable things into being.

11

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

5
THE ‘BEING CREATIVE’ ROOM

One of our meeting rooms in our Sharjah Electricity and Water Authority (SEWA) headquarters building is named ‘Being Creative.’ It was designed to foster creative thinking. The
dictionary defines “being” as “something that actually exists;
it is an inner state.” Being Creative means we are all born creative—it is one of the generous qualities with which we are
gifted. We are all inherently creative, whether we accept it or
not, and whether we activate it or not.. It’s up to you activate
it. You don’t have to be young to start a creative life or to start
think creatively. Just say ‘welcome’ to the first tangible step in
your creativity journey.
The ‘Being Creative’ room is one of the signature rooms in
SEWA headquarters. It’s such a positive environment, from
the welcoming design to the Pablo Picasso quote on the wall:
“Every child is an artist. The problem is how to remain an
artist once we grow up.”
Another wall is decorated with a colorful graphic that features a large ‘Being Creative’ circle in the middle. Childlike
thinking qualities surround the circle to emphasize the notion that creativity is built in from birth. The qualities are:
playfulness, cheerful, curious, freedom, independent, exploration, assertiveness, possibility, and openness. The purpose
is to cultivate open-ended thinking aimed at generating fresh

12

THE BEING CREATIVE ROOM

views and novel solutions. This idea is illustrated in diagram
1 below:
Diagram 1 children’s thinking qualities

13

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

CHILDLIKE THINKING
In this room, we challenge ourselves to solve unsolved problems by giving our minds a way to look at the situation from a
new perspective. Something in our consciousness must shift
in order for us to be able to see how to act positively to the
challenge of the time. When we imagine ourselves as seven
year olds, it vastly increases our creative output on a variety of
challenging tasks. A child’s view of the world is uncomplicated and direct. We take inspiration from children as we foster
innovation.

14

CREATIVITY & ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

6
CREATIVITY AND ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
Artificial intelligence (AI) is making a greater impact than
any aspect of business today. Digital technologies are transforming how we work, play, think, and relate to each other.
There is no doubt in my mind that AI is going to play a major
role in our life and our thinking process. In fact, countries
across the globe are putting AI as one of their top strategic
goals. In 2017, for example, UAE appointed His Excellency
Omar Bin Sultan Al Olama as the country’s first Minister of
State for Artificial Intelligence. At only 27, his responsibilities include investing in the latest technologies and tools of
artificial intelligence and applying them in various sectors to
enhance government performance.
Yet I always say that AI may give you everything except the
human heart and feelings. Don’t mistake me, I’m not suggesting that AI is not worth investing in. Of course not. Without
a doubt, AI has benefitted millions of people all sorts of ways
and touches virtually every facet of their lives. It would be
ridiculous to suggest otherwise. But whatever advancements
and technological solutions AI helps bring to the world, we
still need the human mind, heart, and soul. People are special!

15

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

So it didn’t surprise me to see Jeff Weiner, the CEO at
LinkedIn, share a post on LinkedIn on October 27, 2018,
declaring that the jobs of the future require two major attributes: soft skills and empathy. He argued that AI can accomplish everything that humans can do (including coding), but
robots can’t equip themselves with team synthesizing qualities or communication skills.
Machines and computers will always be our tools. They will
do our orders, as and when we tell them. Ultimately, a computer lacks imagination or creativity to dream up a vision for
the future. It lacks the emotional competent that a human
being has. The computer is helpful in editing your idea, but
it’s not really good at generating ideas. That is the main difference in a human’s brain and a computer’s brain. Thus, creativity will be the soft skill of the future. The cartoonist Tom
Gauld says he stays away from the computer until he’s done
brainstorming his comic strips because once the computer is
involved, “things are on an inevitable path to being finished.
Whereas in my sketchbook the possibilities are endless.”

16

CREATIVITY AND PASSION

7
CREATIVITY AND PASSION

THE PATH TO CREATIVITY
Passion and interest are necessary for creativity to occur.
Creativity is something you do as a result of your passion,
or internal desire to do something. In fact, passion fuels creativity and innovation. An interesting definition of passion
from Mapmaker says, “Passion is the energy that comes from
bringing more of you into what you do.”
Also worth mentioning are these thoughts on passion from
Innovation Management, a preeminent resource for innovation news and best practices. This was posted on March 23,
2005:
“We live and work in exciting, complex, and unpredictable
times. There is little space at the head of the line for those
too timid to risk giving voice to the full force of their innate
creativity.
For those unwilling to allow the fervor of their belief in an
idea to flow freely, a future of passive observation awaits. People who retreat in the face of resistance will find themselves
escorted off the playing field and into the grandstand.
Deep within all human beings there is the fire of passion, the

17

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

audacity of innovation, and the will to persevere. If yours has
been dampened a bit by the vicissitudes of life, find a quiet
spot, bring your attention to your breath, and allow the cells
of your body to remember the life that burns within. Take a
moment or two to recall what matters to you. Fantasize about
the way you want things to be. Relax into the notion that all
good things require both commitment and resilience.”

PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE
You cannot be creative and innovative until and unless you
have a strong feeling of enthusiasm or excitement for your
job, for what you do, and for what you love to do. In short,
creativity comes when you are passionate about your work.
People will be most creative when they feel motivated by the
interest and the challenge of the world itself; this is what we
call intrinsic motivation because it comes from within.
In his book, The 21 Indispensable Qualities of a Leader, John
C. Maxwell shares four truths about passion and what it can
do for you as a leader. I would like to share these parts:

1. Passion Is the First Step to Achievement
Your desire determines your destiny. The passion of great
leaders is undeniable: Gandhi for human rights, Winston
Churchill for freedom, Martin Luther King, Jr. for equality,
Bill Gates for technology.
Anyone who lives beyond an ordinary life has great desire.
It’s true in any field: Weak desire brings weak results just as a

18

CREATIVITY AND PASSION

small fire creates little heat. The stronger your fire, the greater
the desire and the greater the potential.

2. Passion Increases Your Willpower
It is said that a dispassionate young man approached the
Greek philosopher Socrates and casually stated, “O great Socrates, I come to you for knowledge.”
The philosopher took the young man down to the sea, waded
in with him, and then dunked him under the water for thirty seconds. When he let the young man up for air, Socrates
asked him to repeat what he wanted.
“Knowledge, O great one,” he sputtered. Socrates put him
under the water again, only that time a little longer. After
repeated dunkings and responses, the philosopher asked,
“What do you want?” The young man finally gasped, “Air. I
want air!” “Good,” answered Socrates. “Now, when you want
knowledge as much as you wanted air, you shall have it.”
There is no substitute for passion. It is fuel for the will. If you
want anything badly enough, you can find the willpower to
achieve it. The only way to have that kind of desire is to develop passion.

3. Passion Changes You
If you follow your passion—instead of others’ perceptions—
you can’t help becoming a more dedicated, productive person.
And that increases your ability to impact others. In the end,
your passion will have more influence than your personality.

19

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

4. Passion Makes the Impossible Possible
Human beings are so made that whenever anything fires the
soul, impossibilities vanish. A fire in the heart lifts everything
in your life. That’s why passionate leaders are so effective. A
leader with great passion and few skills always outperforms a
leader with great skills and no passion.

20

CREATIVITY IS CONNECTING THINGS

8
CREATIVITY IS CONNECTING THINGS

As Edison said, “Nearly every man who develops an idea
works it up to the point where it looks impossible, and then
he gets discouraged. That’s not the place to become discouraged.” Indeed, that’s the place to start looking for a connection and finding a purpose in your thinking. The question is
then, How can this be?
There are success stories of individuals and organizations that
made the leap to employees’ engagement and idea generation.
Let’s talk about story from Japan.

FIND-A-WAY ATTITUDE
In November 2019, I was invited by the Japan foreign ministry to visit Japan and meet Japanese officials, global brands,
and corporate leaders as recognition for my efforts to enhance and support the business relationship between UAE
and Japan. Part of the trip was to use the bullet train to travel
from Kyoto to Tokyo. This trip was very memorable as I had
the chance to see and wave to His Majesty Naruhito and Her
Majesty Masako, who happened to be on the same train. We
were so happy to meet.

21

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

The origin of the bullet train is also very unique. The story
goes that when Japanese engineers proudly unveiled the latest
model of the bullet train, they didn’t anticipate the downside
of speed. The new train came zooming out of tunnels so fast
that it created a sonic boom. Neighbors from half a kilometer
away complained. The sound was clearly out of regulation,
putting the new train at risk of being decommissioned!
Company engineer Eiji Nakatsu studied the problem. He recognized that the sound was the result of the train hitting the
higher air pressure outside when it emerged from the tunnel. He went in search of an analogy or a similar experience
that would help him study something that moved seamlessly at high speed from a low-pressure environment into a
high-pressure one. From a researcher point of view, that can
mean looking at things in ways people haven’t looked at before.
“Imagination is more important
than knowledge.”
Albert Einstein

Nakatsu was also a birdwatcher and knew that a kingfisher could enter the water without creating a ripple. The long
wedged shape of its beak allowed it to move seamlessly from
air to water. He redesigned the front of the train to mimic the
kingfisher’s beak. The connection he made not only resolved
the noise problem, it let the train use 15 percent less electricity and travel 10 percent faster.

22

CREATIVITY IS CONNECTING THINGS

Every thought and action you take corresponds to a series of
neurons in your brain. And these neurons connect to other
neurons to make what researchers call neural maps. For instance, when you think of the color red, you don’t just think
of the color itself, but also likely an object such as an apple or
a fire truck. The color is connected to something concrete in
your brain. And it does this for higher-level actions as well.
Caroline Webb notes in How to Have a Good Day, “If you
once spent an afternoon cranking out great work while settled into that window seat [at home], your ‘window seat’ neural network might be connected with the one representing
‘extremely productive and focused behavior.’”

23

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

9
WHAT IF

Steve Jobs frequently said, “Creativity is connecting things.”
And, I believe, creativity is connecting the dots that aren’t next
to each other. With that in mind, I saw this in action when I
visited the Singapore Innovation Center (SgIC), which focuses on new innovations for consumers.
The visit took place on March 28, 2014, the inauguration day
of SgIC, which marks a bold step forward in Procter & Gamble’s (P&G) commitment to the 4.8 billion lives they touch
worldwide. I had the chance to meet Yuko Nakamura, Director of P&G SgIC, and Cecilia Tan, Director Global Government Relations & Public Policy, Asia Pacific who were kind
enough to provide a tour of the business units and departments and allow me to experience some of the new products.
They have around 450 engineers and scientists working together in this center that serves as an international innovation hub for P&G’s global hair care, skin care, home care, and
personal health and grooming products.
As the saying goes, “Imagination begins with a question.”
During the meeting, the team showed me a short video titled
“What If,” which amazed me and pushed me to question myself to find easier solutions to our daily problems. The video

24

WHAT IF

is all about your thinking ability to have innovative solutions
that could make human life healthier, easier, better, convenient, and sustainable.

25

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

10
ANALOGY THINKING

Let me introduce you to analogy thinking, a simple tool that
may help you to identify and apply the best feature from other
solutions. It helps you to focus and look at the best practices
from your industry and others and copy what works.
To get clear on this, let me say a few words about the term
“analogy.” According to the Oxford Dictionary, an analogy is
a comparison between one thing and another, typically for
the purpose of explanation or clarification. Here are some examples of simile, one of the main types of analogy:
• As busy as a bee.
• As happy as a calm.
Analogies function to describe or explain one thing by examining its similarities with another thing and to understand
the connection between them. Sometimes the things being
compared are quite similar, but other times they could be
very different. Nevertheless, an analogy explains one thing in
terms of another to highlight the ways in which they are alike.
Like many thinking techniques, Analogy Thinking consists of
three simple steps:

26

ANALOGY THINKING

Step 1: Generate an analogy
Select an action you can compare your situation to. This can
be anything from “planning a meeting” to “making up your
room.” It doesn’t really matter, as long as the action doesn’t
seem to relate to your subject.

Step 2: Find similarities
Once you’ve created an analogy, it’s time to write down as
many similarities as you can think of. Use your imagination
and have some fun with it. You’ll find it much easier than it
sounds.

Step 3: Use similarities to generate ideas
Go through the similarities to find interesting insights. What
is there that you can use to start generating ideas? Look for
new ways to view at your situation.
“Good artists borrow and
great artists steal.”
Unknown

Let’s go through an amazing story about the analogy thinking.

27

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

FINDING THE PERFECT FALL DRINK
We all are very familiar with Starbucks, an American coffee
company and coffeehouse chain founded in Seattle, Washington in 1971 that now has more than 30,000 locations worldwide.
In 2003, Peter Dukes was a product manager in Starbucks’
espresso division. The idea of seasonal Starbucks drinks
wasn’t new at the time. The company had just seen something
that hinted at a bright future—the Peppermint Mocha debuted to great success during the 2002-2003 winter holiday
season. Could the Peppermint Mocha’s success be replicated?
And if so, could it work for different seasons?
Dukes was tasked with capturing Peppermint Mocha levels of
success with a new drink for the autumn season. According
to Seattle Met’s 2014 deep dive into the Pumpkin Spice Latte
(PSL), in the spring of 2003, Dukes and the R&D team brainstormed a list of 20 possible fall latte flavors. Next, they surveyed Starbucks’ customers about which latte ideas most appealed to them. Surprisingly, the idea of “Pumpkin Pie Latte”
just didn’t work for most of the respondents and instead they
favored chocolate- and caramel-based drinks. But when the
time came to narrow the list of 20 down to four to find one
winner for development approval by the higher ups, Dukes
and his team included the pumpkin pie option anyway!
According to company lore, they all gathered and literally
ate pumpkin pie while drinking espresso and tried to figure
out which elements of the baked good played best with the
espresso, and ultimately decided to focus on two main components: Pumpkin and Spice. They mocked up drink after
drink, playing with the flavor profiles of these two compo-

28

ANALOGY THINKING

nents. The winner included high levels of both pumpkin and
spice, and when it came to name the espresso recipe, they
named it “PSL.” Hence, the Starbucks PSL was born by combining two completely different sorts of flavors.

29

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

11
DIVERGENT THINKING

Divergent thinking is the ability to generate many possible
answers to a question, whereas convergent thinking focuses
on a single answer, winnowing down the options. Let’s have
a closer look.

Divergent Thinking
Divergent thinking is an idea generation technique (such as
brainstorming) in which an idea is followed in several directions to lead to one or more new ideas, and, in turn, leads
to still more ideas. Convergent thinking, by contrast, aims
to solve a specific problem. Divergent thinking is creative,
open-ended thinking aimed at generating fresh views and
novel solutions.

Guidelines for Divergent Thinking:
• Defer Judgment. Deferring judgment isn’t the same as
having no judgment. It just means “hold off for a while” and
avoid judging ideas as either bad or good in this phase.
• Combine and Build. Use one idea as a springboard for
another. Build, combine, and improve ideas.

30

DIVERGENT THINKING

• Seek Wild Ideas. Stretch to create wild ideas. While these
may not always work, getting way outside the box provides
the space to discover extraordinary ideas.
• Go for Quantity. Take the time necessary and use the
tools in this guide to generate a long list of potential options.
To make it easier to generate a long list, set a concrete goal
such as at least 50 ideas in seven minutes for groups, or 30
ideas in seven minutes if solo, before going to the next step.

NANO: CREATING A CUSTOMER VALUE
PROPOSITION
It’s not possible to invent or reinvent a business model without first identifying a clear customer value proposition. Often, it starts as a quite simple realization. Imagine, for a moment, that you are standing on a Mumbai road on a rainy
day. You notice the large number of motor scooters snaking
precariously in and out around the cars. As you look more
closely, you see that most bear whole families—both parents
and several children. Your first thought might be, “That’s crazy!” or “That’s the way it is in developing countries, people get
by as best they can.”
When Ratan Tata of Tata Group looked out over this scene,
he saw a critical job to be done: Provide a safer alternative for
scooter families. He understood that the cheapest car available in India cost easily five times what a scooter did and that
many families could not afford one.

31

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

In the middle of difficulty
lies opportunity
Albert Einstein

Highly creative people are practical thinkers. Not only do
they come up with more ideas, they come up with more good
ones, too. They don’t mistake possibilities for probabilities because through time and experience anything is possible. Tata
saw a great opportunity and was able to find a solution by
offering an affordable, safer, all-weather alternative for scooter families. This was a powerful value proposition, one with
the potential to reach tens of millions of people who were
not yet part of the car-buying markets. Ratan Tata also recognized that Tata Motors’ business model could not be used
to develop such a product at the needed price point and so in
2008 Nano car was born—an inexpensive rear-engine hatchback intended to appeal to current riders of motorcycles and
scooters, with a launch price of $2,500 USD.
The purchase price of the Nano was reduced by eliminating
nonessential features, reducing the amount of steel used in
its construction, and relying on low-cost labor. The launch
earned media attention and the Nano received much praise
for its low price and status as “The People’s Car.”

32

CONVERGENT THINKING

12
CONVERGENT THINKING

At certain points in the creative process, thinking and focus
needs to shift. To select the best of our divergent options,
determine their potential value. In the convergent thinking
process, choice is deliberate and conscious. Criteria are purposefully applied as we screen, select, evaluate, and refine the
options, all while knowing that raw ideas still need development.
When it’s time to make decisions about the ideas generated by
divergent thinking, Scott Isaksen, PhD, and Don Treffinger,
PhD, proposed these convergent thinking guidelines in Creative Problem Solving, the Basic Course (1982).

• Be Deliberate: Give decision-making the time and
respect it requires. Avoid snap decisions or harsh judgments.
Give every option a fair chance.
• Check Your Objectives: Verify the choices against your
objectives in each step. This is a reality check—are the
choices on track?
• Improve Your Ideas: Not all ideas are workable solutions.
Even promising ideas must be honed and strengthened. Take
the time to improve your ideas.

33

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

• Be Affirmative: Even in convergence, it’s important to
first consider what’s good about an idea and judge it for the
purpose of improving, rather than eliminating, ideas.
• Consider Novelty: Do not dismiss novel or original
ideas. Consider ways to tailor, rework, or tame.

BUILT TO SERVE
Uber started as a simple idea: What if you could request a ride
from your phone? But what began as a novel thought quickly
grew into a global brand focused on helping move you toward
opportunity out in the world. Here’s a peek into the company’s origin story:

December 2008; On a cold winter evening in Paris, Travis
Kalanick and Garrett Camp couldn’t get a ride. That’s when
the idea for Uber was born.
March 2009; The two entrepreneurs developed a smartphone
app that gave people the power to tap a button and request a
ride.
July 5, 2010; The first Uber rider requested a trip across San
Francisco.
December 2011; Uber launched internationally in Paris, the
same city where the idea was born three years earlier.

34

CONVERGENT THINKING

In the present days, in addition to helping people get from
point A to point B, Uber is working to bring the future closer
with self-driving technology and urban air transport, helping
people order food quickly and affordably, removing barriers
to healthcare, creating new freight-booking solutions, and
helping companies provide a seamless employee travel experience. That’s the reason I love to call it Built to Serve.

35

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

13
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
In a December 2015 article for the Harvard Business Review, Clayton Christensen with co-authors Michael Raynor
and Rory McDonald set out to clear up confusion over the
meaning of disruptive innovation. They explained that “disruption” describes a process whereby a smaller company with
fewer resources is able to successfully challenge established
incumbent businesses. Specifically, as incumbents focus on
improving their products and services for their most demanding (and usually most profitable) customers, they exceed the needs of some segments and ignore the needs of
others. Entrants that prove disruptive begin by successfully
targeting those overlooked segments, gaining a foothold by
delivering more suitable functionality, frequently at a lower
price. Incumbents, chasing higher profitability in more demanding segments, tend to not respond vigorously. Entrants
then move upmarket, delivering the performance that incumbents’ mainstream customers require, while preserving the
advantages that drove their early success. When mainstream
customers start adopting the entrants’ offerings in volume,
disruption has occurred.
Disruptive innovations are made possible because they get
started in two types of markets that incumbents overlook:
low-end footholds and new-market footholds. Low-end foot-

36

DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION

holds exist because incumbents typically try to provide their
most profitable and demanding customers with ever-improving products and services, and they pay less attention to less
demanding customers. In fact, incumbents’ offerings often
overshoot the performance requirements of the latter. This
opens the door to a disrupter focused (at first) on providing
those low-end customers with a “good enough” product.
In the case of new-market footholds, disrupters create a market where none existed. Simply put, they find a way to turn
nonconsumers into consumers. For example, in the early
days of photocopying technology, Xerox targeted large corporations and charged high prices in order to provide the
performance that those customers required. School librarians, bowling-league operators, and other small customers,
priced out of the market, made do with carbon paper or mimeograph machines. Then in the late 1970s, new challengers
introduced personal copiers, offering an affordable solution
to individuals and small organizations—and, thus, a new
market was created. From this relatively modest beginning,
personal photocopier makers gradually built a major position
in the mainstream photocopier market that Xerox valued.
A disruptive innovation, by definition, starts from one of
those two footholds. There are outliers: Uber, the much-feted
transportation company whose mobile application connects
consumers who need rides with drivers who are willing to
provide them, did not originate in either one. Founded in
2009, Uber has enjoyed fantastic growth and it is difficult to
claim that the company found a low-end opportunity— that
would have meant taxi service providers had overshot the
needs of a material number of customers by making cabs too
plentiful, too easy to use, and too clean. Neither did Uber pri-

37

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

marily target nonconsumers—people who found the existing
alternatives so expensive or inconvenient that they took public transit or drove themselves instead. Uber was launched in
San Francisco (a well-served taxi market), and Uber’s customers were generally people already in the habit of hiring
rides.
While disrupters typically start by appealing to low-end or
underserved consumers and then migrate to the mainstream
market, Uber has gone in exactly the opposite direction,
building a position in the mainstream market first and subsequently appealing to historically overlooked segments. Uber
has quite arguably been increasing total demand—that’s what
happens when you develop a better, less-expensive solution
to a widespread customer need.

38

2

INNOVATION
“I am a Day Dreamer
and a Night Thinker.”
- Unknown

39

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

1
WHAT IS INNOVATION?

Innovation is an act of implementing something new, or it
can simply be defined as turning “creativity into reality.” It
is a process of transforming unique, creative ideas into new
realities, which may turn into greater benefits, depending on
their impact on the business organization, government, and
society.
Innovation is a hot topic in business magazines, training and
development programs, and thought leadership. Why? There
are several reasons, one being that the market place is flattening and customers have become accustomed to high-quality
innovative products and services.

INNOVATING FOR THE FUTURE
Mastering innovation is a strategic imperative. Peter Druker
said, “The enterprise that does not innovate ages and declines.
And in a period of rapid change such as the present, the decline will be fast.” Innovation is a growth multiplier. Millennial companies have claimed that innovation is a definitive
driver of rapid and profitable revenue growth. In fact, they
consider it a “competitive necessity” for their organizations.
According to PwC’s 2013 study “Unleashing the Power of Innovation,” 74 percent of CEOs regard innovation as equally

40

WHAT IS INNOVATION

important to the success of their company as operational effectiveness, if not more. This is the first time in recent history that innovation has been on a par with operations in the
C-suite.
A misconception is that innovation is only about introducing
a new product. but we can innovate our customer services,
partnerships, business models, marketing methods, and
more. Indeed, opportunities for innovation exist at all levels
in many ways. So stop restricting yourself and let your ideas
come into reality. The world is in search of creative and innovative people. What is stopping you from starting?

BITCOIN
While I was writing this page there is one digital currency
that comes to mind that has become very well known in innovation circles; it’s the Bitcoin (BTC). It is a consensus network that enables a new payment system and a completely
digital currency. Powered by its users, Bitcoin is a peer-topeer payment network that requires no central authority to
operate. On October 31, 2008, an individual or group of individuals operating under the pseudonym “Satoshi Nakamoto”
published the BTC Whitepaper and described it as “a purely
peer-to-peer version of electronic cash, which would allow
online payments to be sent directly from one party to another
without going through a financial institution.”

41

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

2
SHAPE A NEW FUTURE

Innovation isn’t just having a few bright ideas; it’s about creating value and helping organizations continuously adapt and
evolve. In 2019, ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) developed a new series of International Standards on innovation management. ISO is a worldwide federation of national standards bodies (ISO member bodies), and
the work of preparing International Standards is normally
carried out through ISO technical committees.
Innovation is an increasingly important contributor to the
success of an organization, enhancing its ability to adapt in a
changing world. Novel and innovative ideas give rise to better
ways of working, as well as new solutions for generating revenue and improving sustainability. It is closely linked to the
resilience of an organization, in that it helps the company understand and respond to challenging contexts, seize opportunities that innovation might bring, and leverage the creativity
of both its own people and those it deals with.
Ultimately, big ideas and new inventions are often the result
of a long series of little thoughts and changes, all captured and
directed in the most effective way. One of the most efficient
ways of doing just that is through implementing an innovation management system.

42

SHAPE A NEW FUTURE

An innovation management system provides a systemic approach to integrate innovation into all the layers of an organization in order to seize and create opportunities for the development of new solutions, systems, products, and services.
According to the official webpage of ISO, the first International Standard for such systems has just been published:
ISO 56002, Innovation management — Innovation management system — Guidance, covers all aspects of innovation
management, from how to generate those first sparks of an
idea to selling something new in the marketplace. It considers the context that an organization is working in, the culture, strategy, processes, and impact. It crosses many types of
activities including products and services, business models,
organizational innovation, and more, and is applicable to all
types of organization, regardless of size or type.
Alice de Casanove, Chair of the ISO technical committee who
developed the standard, says ISO 56002 will help organizations increase business opportunities and their performance
in a multitude of ways:
“Every organization that wants to master their future needs
to incorporate some aspects of innovation management. That
is, they need to evolve and adapt to keep up with market and
societal trends,” she says.
“The challenge is to identify what will give them the competitive edge and create value for the future, and thus which
strategic actions to take. By providing guidance on how to
best capture their ideas, test them effectively, and manage the
risks and opportunities associated, ISO 56002 can help organizations create new value propositions and maximize their
potential in a structured way.”

43

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

ISO 56002 can also help to instil a culture of innovation in
an organization, adds de Casanove, thereby harnessing the
creativity and motivation of every member of the organization and ultimately improving the company’s collaboration,
communication, and performance.

44

INCREMENTAL INNOVATION

3
INCREMENTAL INNOVATION

Recently business schools worldwide began to include incremental and radical innovations in their curriculum. What is
so unique about this? Let’s look to innovations based on the
views of the Design Council UK, an independent charity and
the government’s advisor on design. The Design Council UK
works with the world vision that the role and value of design
is recognized as a fundamental creator of value, enabling happier, healthier, and safer lives for all.

INCREMENTAL INNOVATION
Finding big ideas in a crowded space
Looking at an existing market or product and finding an
opportunity to make an improvement to the way it looks or
works is the bread and butter of design. For market leaders,
it’s a necessity to staying ahead, as design can be used to attract a new user group or differentiate a product by making
it easier to use.
The advantages of the incremental innovation process are
threefold:

45

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

1. Staying competitive
Every next-generation product needs to compete; it’s a must.
Products need to evolve to allow competition with the previous generation to roll on.

2. Ideas are easier to sell
You are offering a recognizable product to an existing market,
therefore it makes it so much easier to communicate and sell
your big idea.

3. Affordability
The process of incremental production allows for affordable
development. Products can be made better without breaking
the bank.
Of course there are disadvantages to focusing on smaller, more prudent design innovations—getting noticed in a
crowded and noisy marketplace can be tough and there is the
challenge of creating a genuinely differentiated, improved offering. The question to ask is how different is your product
really? Also, brands are never alone; competition is high playing the same game, for the very same reasons.
The real opportunity in this process of innovation is for design to start with the need, not the solution. If you build your
big ideas from the need, incremental innovations will follow.
Here are some successful stories covering incremental innovation.
The Joseph Elevate collection is a really good example of incremental innovation with its unique twist on an existing
design. This company has built an empire on clever, yet sim-

46

INCREMENTAL INNOVATION

ply designed, kitchen products. Their adaptation of everyday
kitchen utensils has resulted in not one but a whole family
innovative new products.
Another incremental innovation success story is the new
Bouroullec Serif TV for Samsung Designed by Ronan & Erwan Bouroullec. Love it or hate it, Samsung added a new layer of desirability to an existing product by turning a generic
flat screen TV into a piece of furniture. The Serif is designed
to be portable and with minimum clutter and maximum
ease, you can place your Serif anywhere in the room—on the
stand or even a table—for any occasion. Its unique I-shaped
profile is sharper and more sophisticated than ever, giving it
a completely different look than any other TV. It’s the very
definition of minimalism design that’s created to elevate your
room’s aesthetic. Your screen doesn’t have to be black when
it’s turned off. A range of choices and settings make it simple
to transform your TV screen and use it in different ways, like
Ambient Mode, which serves up beautiful images and useful
information.
Finally, it’s worth it to mention Ayca Dundar, a Design Council Spark finalist and inventor of the Pop Umbrella—a retake
on the traditional umbrella design by being flexible and less
likely to break. Pop Umbrella’s sustainable design consists of
only six parts and has a supple structure, so it flexes during
strong winds. It also closes into a compact flat disk for ease of
transport. All in all, Ayca hopes Pop Umbrella will result in
fewer lost and broken umbrellas on the streets on rainy days.

47

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

4
RADICAL INNOVATION

FINDING BIG IDEAS THAT MAKE SENSE
This approach is larger scale—it disrupts both context and
purpose. Radical innovation is changing the way we think
and it can lead to the creation of new markets and industries.
A great example of radical product innovation is the Pebble smart watch. Bursting onto the market via Kickstarter in
2012, the technology and its application created a whole new
category long before Apple joined in with the launch of their
Apple Watch, three years later.
Another product innovator that follows the radical approach
is Dyson. They have gone through the process of reinventing
often-overlooked categories of domestic appliances such as
the vacuum and fan. They have delivered market disruption
not only through technology, but also through their business
model.
So, what’s the reward of radical innovation?

1. Bigger wins
The chance of getting a ‘bigger win’ is one of the main advantages of radical innovation.

48

RADICAL INNOVATION

2. Market ownership
With an entirely innovative idea comes the chance to create a
whole new brand and market—a market so untapped that a
single design could gain a monopoly.

3. More accessible to new players
The radical model suits new players far better, as they have
no incumbent history that can restrain the breadth of their
innovative design—they have a blank, limitless canvas. With
Kickstarter allowing new and exciting inventors to launch
into a large marketplace, radicals will continue to wow the
world with products we didn’t even know we needed.
However, timing is everything with radical product innovation. If timed well it can be the perfect fit, but if a product
comes out too early there is a chance people will not get it,
let alone want it. Also, technology is often underdeveloped,
causing slow market adoption.
Another consideration is that to develop the technology to
match the potential of the product, substantial investment
must be made. Radical innovation, as impulsive as its sounds,
is in fact the longer game to play in terms of returns. Markets can be slow to grow when time framing and exploring
an idea.
Nonetheless, radical exploration and subversion of existing
product categories that are often overlooked can result in
huge success—who wouldn’t want to be the next Dyson?
The time has come. Designers have a choice to make: Are you
for the incremental approach or are you a radical?

49

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

50

3

THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN
CREATIVITY AND
INNOVATION
“Innovation is creativity
with a job to do.”
– John Emmerling

51

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

1
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION

I spend more than sixty days a year chatting with business
leaders and managers about the single greatest challenge they
face in the new, fast- moving economy: Winning the innovation game.
After most of my presentations and workshops, I am frequently asked about the difference between creativity and
innovation. My answer is always the same: There is no innovation without creativity. People sometimes get confused
between creativity and innovation so let’s begin with some
fundamentals and very simple definitions, which can help us
easily differentiate between the two.
Creativity is the ability to think of something new, whereas
innovation means executing creative ideas or implementing
something new.
Bearing in mind this basic difference, we can further differentiate the two using an example: Suppose you are working on
a project and you come up with a fresh new idea to execute
the project. That is creativity (your mind’s ability to think and
create some new ideas), but it is not an innovation until the
idea is implemented.

52

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Furthermore, creativity is the act of generating unique ideas,
whereas innovation could be introducing something better
into the market. There is no risk in creativity because it is a
virtual (or thought?) process, however there is always risk
in innovation because it is reality. For many leaders, this is
uncomfortable territory because, by definition, innovation
means trying something new and accepting the risk that it
may not work out.
There is no doubt that innovation is inherently risky, and
getting the most from a portfolio of innovation initiatives is
more about managing risk than eliminating it. Since no one
knows exactly where valuable innovations will emerge, and
searching everywhere is impractical, do not push yourself too
hard—the best ideas show up when you are relaxed and aiming for excellence. That is it!

CREATIVITY IS NOT INNOVATION
I read the Harvard Business Review quite often to keep myself
up to date with what’s going on in the business world and to
look for time-honed best practices that stand out from the
pack. This time, I found something that totally justifies and
shines a light on my above-mentioned belief: “Creativity is
not innovation.”
In August 2010, Harvard surveyed thousands of executives
in Fortune 500 companies to rate their companies’ innovation skills on a scale of 1 to 10: 1 being poor and 10 being
world class. The survey participants overwhelmingly believed
that their companies were better at generating ideas (average

53

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

score of 6) than at commercializing them (average score of 1).
So, which is more effective: Improving your (already good)
creativity score from 6 to 8 or increasing your (very poor)
execution score from 1 to 3?
It is no contest. Companies tend to focus far more on improving the front end of the innovation process—creativity—but
the real leverage is in the back end.
Ideas will only get you so far. Consider companies that struggled even after a competitor entered the market and made
their great idea transparent to all. Did Xerox stumble because
nobody noticed that Canon had introduced personal copiers? Did Kodak fall behind because they were blind to the
rise of digital photography? Did Sears suffer a decline because
they had no awareness of Wal-Mart’s new everyday low-price
discount retail format? In every case, the ideas were there. It
was the follow-through that was lacking. In fact, Harvard’s
research found that innovation initiatives face their stiffest
resistance after they show hints of success, begin to consume
significant resources, and clash with the existing organization
at multiple levels—that is, long after the idea generation stage.

CREATIVITY FUELS INNOVATION
Thomas Edison, the greatest innovator of all time, put it well:
“Innovation is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.” Reflect on how much time your organization spends
on inspiration versus perspiration. What are the barriers to
execution? How are you attempting to overcome them?

54

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

BARRIERS TO INNOVATION
The following quote from Thomas J. Watson Jr., the Former
IBM chairman and CEO, gives me encouragement: Watson
was asked in an interview, “How long does it take to achieve
excellence?” Watson snapped back, “A minute! You achieve
excellence by promising yourself right now that you will never again knowingly do anything that is not excellent—regardless of any pressure to do otherwise by any boss or situation.”
In November 2006, IBM Global Business Services published
a report that mentioned five barriers to innovation: inadequate funding, risk avoidance, siloing, time commitments,
and incorrect measures.
While each of these barriers can be formidable, they don’t
need to stop your innovation. Successful innovators use a
number of techniques to work their ways around these barriers or break right through them. Let’s have a closer look.
Barrier #1: Inadequate funding. Getting the start-up funds
for an innovation project often means taking money away
from an established program. Getting the money at just
the right time is also problematic since organizations often work on annual funding cycles that don’t match up well
with real-world opportunities. And, often, excellent innovation needs more than seed money to survive and before it is
starved out of existence. But broader thinking on needs and
resources can help innovators move their ideas along.
Barrier #2: Risk avoidance. Most of us won’t run toward risks.
We want to maintain our health, wealth, and peace of mind.
But no progress is made without calculated risk taking. Since
people know that innovation is risky, many people run away

55

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

from it. In fact, some organizations habitually play the game
of finding things that could go wrong. Many of the classic responses, “We’ve never done this before” or “This failed when
we tried it before” come up almost as a reflex. Once risks are
identified, innovation is often stopped. But a clear-eyed view
of risks balanced against benefits can create an environment
where innovation is nurtured rather than killed.
Barrier #3: Siloing. Organizations seek to protect their creative identities, get proper credit, sustain themselves, and
protect themselves. That’s why they create boundaries, assign
responsibilities, and put rules in place. No matter how artificial the divisions and processes are, they are usually defended, even when ignoring them is to everyone’s advantage.
By nature, innovations tend to cross boundaries and create
new categories. It’s not unusual to see competing claims of
ownership and disputes about authority. Deals break down
over who will run things and how imagined profits will be
divided. As a result, innovations that might benefit the whole
enterprise are killed by organizations that don’t benefit themselves, don’t see their benefits, or don’t get a “fair share” of
benefits. But a better understanding of the needs and concerns of organizations can be a starting point for managing
the natural organizational conflicts innovation creates.
Barrier #4: Time commitments. Time is a scarce and precious commodity. One of management’s jobs is to verify
that minutes are productively filled. And while enlightened
management will invest some of workers’ on-the-job time in
education, experimentation, relationships, personal growth,
and health, it’s difficult to prove that such investments pay off.
Even worse, such investments may not pay off in a timely way

56

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

for a sponsoring organization (for example, quick enough for
returns to be apparent through a quarterly measurement)...
But increasing the value, benefits, and urgency of innovation
will tend to free up time for work on it.
Barrier #5: Incorrect measures. For many organizations, revenue, profits, and market share are the only measures used.
These are easier to quantify than intangibles such as reputation, knowledge, attractiveness to talent, leadership, and other assets that make major contributions to the true value of
an enterprise.
Most innovations that matter are difficult to explain in terms
of return on investment (ROI). Even those innovations that
have the potential to disrupt or create new markets may suffer
by comparison when put up against more pedestrian projects
as they grind through a standard budgeting process. But by
expanding the view of measures and including decision makers in the process of creating new measures, it’s often possible
to avoid the ROI trap.

57

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

2
WORLD CREATIVITY AND
INNOVATION DAY

The mission (or objective or inspiration) of World Creativity and Innovation Day (#WCID), an initiative by the UN,
is to encourage creative multidisciplinary thinking to help
us achieve the sustainable future we want. #WCID was first
commemorated in more than 50 countries around the world
on April 21, 2002. In 2006, #WCID became a week (#WCIW
April 15 to 21) to give people ample time to explore diverse
points of view. April 15, the first day of #WCIW, is also the
birthday of Leonardo da Vinci, an icon of cross-disciplinary
creativity in the arts and sciences, who exemplified how these
fields can inform and enhance each other.

Wealth of Nations
The true wealth of nations in the 21st century arises from
creativity and innovation, at both the individual and group
levels, according to the findings of the special edition of the
Creative Economy Report “Widening Local Development
Pathways,” co-published by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the UN
Development Programme (UNDP) through the UN Office
for South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC).

58

WORLD CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION DAY

Creativity and Culture
The creative economy, which includes audiovisual products,
design, new media, performing arts, publishing, and visual
arts, is a highly transformative sector of the world economy in terms of income generation, job creation, and export
earnings. Culture is an essential component of sustainable
development and represents a source of identity, innovation,
and creativity for the individual and community. At the same
time, creativity and culture have a significant non-monetary
value that contributes to inclusive social development and to
dialogue and understanding between people.

Economic Growth Strategies
Cultural and creative industries should be part of economic growth strategies, according to the UNESCO report on
culture and sustainable development. These industries are
among the most dynamic sectors in the world economy, generating $2.25 billion in revenue and 29.5 million jobs worldwide. In that spirit, countries are harnessing the potential of
high-growth areas of the market for economic returns and
poverty alleviation.

New Momentum
On #WCID, the world is invited to embrace the idea that innovation is essential for harnessing the economic potential
of nations. Innovation, creativity, and mass entrepreneurship
can provide new momentum for economic growth and job
creation. It can expand opportunities for everyone, including

59

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

women and youth. It can provide solutions to some of the
most pressing problems such as poverty eradication and the
elimination of hunger.

60

4

UAE NATIONAL
INNOVATION
STRATEGY

“Human beings, their ideas, innovations, dreams, and connections are the
capital of the future. Because where
great minds go today, great things will
happen tomorrow.”
- H.H. Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum

61

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

1
UAE NATIONAL
INNOVATION STRATEGY

In October 2014, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin
Rashid Al Maktoum, vice president and prime minister of the
UAE and ruler of Dubai, launched the UAE National Innovation Strategy with the aim of making the UAE one of the most
innovative nations in the world within seven years. His Highness made a very important announcement that day: “We invite all research institutions around the world to participate
in a competition of $1 million USD to be awarded to people
who can find sustainable, cheap, and innovative solutions. ”
Below are some of the details of strategy from the official
UAE government page (https://uaecabinet.ae/en/the-national-strategy-for-innovation) that I would like to share with my
dear readers.
The strategy consists of four tracks:

Track 1: Establish a Stimulating Environment
for Innovation in the form of Supportive
Institutions and Laws
This track will shape specialized entities such as innovation
incubators as well as technological infrastructure to fuel innovation in all sectors. It will also focus on research and development in various innovation fields.

62

UAE NATIONAL INNOVATION STRATEGY

Track 2: Develop Government Innovation by
Institutionalizing Innovative Practices with
the Support of an Integrated System of Modern
Tools
The strategy requires all government entities to reduce spending by one percent and dedicate the savings to research and
innovation projects. National training and education programs on innovation will also be launched.

Track 3: Encourage Private Sector Innovation by
Stimulating Companies to Establish Innovation
and Scientific Research Centers, Adopt New
Technologies, and Develop Innovative Products
and Services
The UAE will attract pioneering international firms in key
innovation sectors, establish innovation communities and
zones, and support applied research in areas of national priority. It will also enhance the UAE’s position as an international center to test innovations.

Track 4: Prepare Individuals with Highly
Innovative Skills by Concentrating on Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics,
Including the Creation of Educational Material
for Schools and Universities
The aim is to establish a national culture that encourages
innovation and entrepreneurship through partnerships between the public, private, and media sectors.
The framework for the strategy is structured around the following three key pillars:

63

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Pillar 1: An Innovation-Enabling Environment
The strategy seeks to develop an environment that promotes
and enables innovation by developing the right regulatory framework, providing comprehensive enabling services,
enhancing the technology infrastructure, and ensuring the
availability of investments and incentives.

Pillar 2: Innovation Champions
The strategy seeks to create innovation champions in individuals, companies, institutions, and government.

Pillar 3: Innovation Priority Sectors
The strategy targets stimulating innovation in these seven
sectors:

• renewable energy
• transportation
• education
• health
• technology
• water
• space

64

UAE INNOVATION MONTH

2
UAE INNOVATION MONTH
The first UAE Innovation Week Festival was held in November 2015, and it included more than 100 activities in each of
the seven emirates in UAE to celebrate innovation across the
country from the government and private sectors, as well as
from the public. The festival attracted various segments of society, such as students and young people, citizens, residents,
visitors, and government employees. During the launch of
Innovation Week, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed said,
“Innovation offers a new method of functioning for UAE’s
vital sector. We will assess the progress achieved in the adoption of this method through the UAE Innovation Week. We
have multiplied our investments in innovation, especially in
terms of equipping and training our national cadres, because
keeping pace with the rapid changes taking place in the world
requires innovative cadres and an environment that supports
innovation.” He also added, “Our government agencies are
racing to come up with creative ideas as part of the UAE’s
approach of innovation.”
Sheikh Mohammed stated that the UAE government has
gone through phases of development by establishing quality
and excellence criteria and performance evaluations, and by
providing online and smart services in every field. He highlighted the importance of innovation, saying, “If the govern-

65

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

ment succeeds in providing the best innovation environment
for its staff, we can provide a better future for our citizens.”

Following the success of UAE Innovation Week 2015 and 2016,
UAE Innovation Month was announced to celebrate “innovation” across the nation. The month-long festival aims to:
• Help strengthen the country’s position as a global hub for
innovation.
• Enhance the development of innovative ideas and
capabilities, and create a widespread culture of innovation.
• Celebrate innovation in the UAE and support the national
innovation strategy.
UAE Innovation Month is one of the largest innovation festivals in the world and this consolidated effort by government,
the private sector, and individuals helps to create a widespread culture of innovation in the UAE.

66

TAKAMUL

3
TAKAMUL
Launched in 2011, Takamul is a UAE innovation program to
support inventors and promote innovation across the country. Takamul (meaning “integration” in Arabic) describes the
“integral” mathematical operation. In mathematics, an integral represents the sum of results for an equation between
two points.
Similar to its mathematical namesake, the Takamul Program’s
ultimate mission is to facilitate the integration of each stage
of the innovation cycle between the starting point (generating ideas) and the end state (the practical application of these
ideas through innovative products, solutions, and services).
This is illustrated in the program’s logo–an integral sign that
begins with ideas (colored in grey) and transitions into application (colored in red).
Takamul focuses on making UAE one of the most innovative
countries in the world by promoting the innovation cycle,
from the generation of ideas to the practical implementation of these ideas into commercial activities that support the
country economically and socially.
In mature, knowledge-based economies, innovation in the
science and technology industries has contributed significantly to their economic growth. Takamul is aligned with

67

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Abu Dhabi’s Economic Vision 2030 to drive human capital in
science and technology by helping inventors and innovators
of every age turn their dreams into reality.

68

MOHAMMED BIN RASHID INNOVATION FUND

4
MOHAMMED BIN RASHID
INNOVATION FUND

The Mohammed bin Rashid Innovation Fund is a federally sponsored initiative conceived and sponsored by the
Ministry of Finance UAE to support local innovators in accessing affordable finance through the provision of a government-backed guarantee. The Fund works with local innovators to facilitate innovation activities through targeted
financial risk mitigation and business development tools
aimed at sustainable growth. The targeted vision of the Innovation Fund is to:
• Bridge the financing gap across innovation projects.
• Commercially accelerate the UAE’s innovative products
and services in regional and international markets.
• Promote the UAE’s reputation and footprint on the
international innovation scene.
• Improve the UAE’s economic competitiveness and expand
its national growth potential.
• Stimulate public-private collaboration in innovation.
The Fund’s holdings of $544 million USD was announced
in November 2015 during the UAE’s inaugural Innovation

69

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Week, which sought to showcase a variety of innovative initiatives across federal and local levels of government and
within the private sector.
The Fund will act on behalf of the UAE government to provide a guarantee as security to a financier as an incentive to
encourage the issuance of a loan and to reduce collateral required from the applicant. It is the path to making the UAE
a leader in innovation and improving the quality of life for
people in the UAE and the world.
I feel fortunate enough to be a citizen of this great country,
working under great authentic leadership, which promotes
innovation in almost every possible area to create a better tomorrow for all.

70

INNOVATION IN EDUCATION

5
INNOVATION IN EDUCATION

On January 17, 2017, His Highness Sheikh Dr. Sultan bin
Muhammad Al Qasimi, member of the Supreme Council
and ruler of Sharjah and president of American University
of Sharjah (AUS), met with Kai Mykkänen, the minister for
foreign trade and development of Finland, at the Al-Badya
palace in Sharjah. I was personally invited to attend the meeting, the purpose of which was to discuss the future development plans of the university and the establishment of the
Research, Technology, and Innovation Park by AUS Enterprises (AUSE) adjacent to University City and the signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between AUSE and
the Council of Oulu Region (Northern Ostrobothnia, Finland). The five-year agreement was signed to facilitate mutual cooperation in the fields of research and development;
improvement of innovation in education, trade, science and
technology, business; and industrial development in Sharjah
and the Oulu region with both party administrations sharing
experiences.
Hussain Al Mahmoudi, CEO of AUSE, said, “His Highness
the ruler of Sharjah discussed with the visiting minister several ways of collaboration that would enable Sharjah and Finland to benefit from each other’s expertise and knowledge,
whether it be in research and development or business and

71

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

commerce. Some of the ideas that were discussed were potential partnerships between private sector entities in the
fields of technology and entrepreneurship and the potential
establishment of a Finland innovation center at the Research,
Technology, and Innovation Park.”
I must say that this great effort taken by both parties could
foster a significant and positive change to traditional education through innovation.

72

UAE’S MOST RECOGNIZED CHILD INVENTOR

6
UAE’s MOST RECOGNIZED CHILD
INVENTOR

Eleven-year-old Emirati inventor Adeeb Al Balushi is on a
mission to save and improve people’s lives through innovation. From a very early age, he has been getting recognition
for his awesome inventions. It was a trip to the beach that
sparked Adeeb’s inventing career, when his father, who had
suffered from polio, could not go swimming because of his
prosthetic leg. Adeeb, then six, made his father a waterproof
alternative using an enhanced medical wax coating. That was
his very first invention, and then, soon after, he created a
small vibrating robot to help his mother clean small spaces.
Awesome job! His inventions did not take much time before
they grabbed the attention of the media, which led the Dubai
government to subsequently contact him.
With the government’s supervision and funding, Adeeb has
come up with more inventions since then, including a seat
belt that monitors a passenger’s heart rate and alerts the authorities when it is too high or low, a fireproof helmet with a
camera system to help the person see during emergency, and
a smart wheelchair for the disabled. At a very young age, he is
doing so much in the field of innovation, which is truly worth
appreciating.

73

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

In November 2014, he addressed 3,000 delegates at the International Telecommunication Union conference in Busan,
Korea. He is one of the youngest inventors in the world and
was given the Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum Award for
Distinguished Academic Performance. Adeeb was also featured on CNN for his wonderful inventions.
Last year, I had the chance of meeting and recognizing Adeeb
during our monthly progress meeting at SEWA under the
theme of innovation for a better tomorrow. I saw great motivation and inspiration in his personality to make a difference
in people’s lives through innovation. During the gathering, he
was with his parents, who commented that Adeeb, since his
early childhood, loves to make and break the toys they give
him to create something new out of them.
Since April 2014, he has been on an international scientific
tour with the Emirates Institution for Advanced Science and
Technology, which has had him attending academic conferences, meeting with researchers, and even attending a space
camp at the US Space and Rocket Center in Alabama. He was
quoted as saying, “I’ve learned a lot, but most importantly,
I’m having fun while doing it.”
On April 4, 2017, the University of Manchester, UK; honored
Adeeb and his younger sister Dana, 11, for their scientific
achievements in the fields of medical sciences and space sciences.
Adeeb and Dana are the first and youngest students to discuss scientific research on full-scale projects at the National
Graphene Institute at the University of Manchester, impressing the institute’s management for their considerable research,
logic, and scientific qualities.

74

FIRST EMIRATI FEMALE INVENTOR

7
FIRST EMIRATI FEMALE INVENTOR

I am proud to write about the first female Emirati inventor,
Reem Al Marzouqi, who received a bachelor’s degree in architectural engineering from United Arab Emirates University and has a US patent for her original invention, a “lower
extremity vehicle navigation control system.” Her invention is
basically a car that can be driven without hands, and the idea
for this system came into her mind when she was watching an
interview with the world’s first licensed armless pilot, Jessica
Cox, where she mentioned the difficulties that she faces when
driving cars for long distances using only her feet.
Dr. Haik, a professor at the College of Engineering, said,
“Reem has realized the difficulty faced by people who suffer
from either temporary or permanent disabilities. Further, she
has provided them with an option to drive with a steering
lever, acceleration lever, and a brake lever to enable the car to
be controlled solely with the driver’s feet with a high level of
control and flexibility. The machine was tested in a parking
area, and the results were interesting and encouraging.” She
said, “The car fitted with the system is not only beneficial for
those with disabilities but can also be used in peacekeeping
operations, industrial situations where the driver is required
to use hands for other operations, or for military exercises.”

75

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

So, Reem, together with her team, designed a system for a
good cause. I must say that it also is a remarkable step towards humanity through creative and innovative thinking.
Well done, Reem. Keep challenging tomorrow. See you at the
top always. God bless you!

76

THE FIRST EMIRATI TO BECOME A THEORETICAL PHYSICIST

8
The First Emirati to Become a
Theoretical Physicist

Emirati physicist Ahmed Almheiri has won a prestigious scientific award for his study of black holes in space.
Almheiri and his research team were among the new scientists
who received the $100,000 New Horizons Prize presented by
The Breakthrough Prize Foundation, dubbed the “science Oscars.” The Breakthrough Prize Foundation is considered one
of the most significant scientific awards in the world. Every
year, the New Horizons in Physics Prize, which was founded by Yuri Milner, a science and technology investor and
philanthropist, is awarded to researchers who have produced
important work in science. It has awarded more than $250
million to 3,000 scientists since its inception in 2012.
Al Muhairi is currently doing his postdoctoral studies in
physics at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at Princeton University. The institute was established in 1930 with esteemed physicist Albert Einstein as one of its first professors.
Almheiri, who is also a long-term member of the School of
Natural Sciences, coauthored a paper in 2012 that confounded theoretical physicists, garnered attention from The New
York Times and Scientific American, and prompted the orga-

77

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

nization of various workshops and the publication of dozens
of papers around the world.
The paper, “Black Holes: Complementarity or Firewalls?”
gives an explanation of Stephen Hawking’s black hole information paradox of 1974, which showed that black holes radiate particles, known as Hawking radiation, as they shrink in
size and eventually evaporate completely.
Almheiri was born and raised in Abu Dhabi, UAE. He is the
second youngest of a large brood of three brothers and nine
sisters. His mother never received a formal education; however, his father, who had earned a degree, became one of the
founders of the UAE Red Crescent and its first chairman of
the board of directors. His father is now retired and tends to
the family farm.
In a biography published by the IAS, Almheiri is recognized
as the first Emirati to become a theoretical physicist and
member of the prestigious institute.

78

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It’s with my deepest gratitude and love that I dedicate this
book to Alleem R&D center’s wonderful employees. It is because of your boundless devotion, hard work, passion for our
brand, and spirit of innovation that Alleem R&D continues to
make people’s lives better.
A book like this is not possible without the help of many
others. The inspiration to write the book came from my dear
family. Thank you for your support, as you are always there
for me. You are an inspiration.
I am also grateful to my Alleem Research & Development Senior Officer Shabih Fatima for her advice, support, and encouragement as she has read and reviewed several draft of
this manuscript.
Thank you to the entire Alleem R&D staff. I so appreciate you
all. You are amazing!
Thank You to every volunteer, staff, person & leader I have
had the honor and privilege to work with in my lifetime.
Finally, even though they ae no longer with us, I have to
thank my parents for their love and unwavering support. I
wish I could have half of their character. Miss you every day
and love you much.

79

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

ALLEEM

SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT

GOALS

Alleem 21 Sustainable Development
Goals
By drawing examples from a number of countries, Dr. Rashid
teased out the diverse, but intersecting domains of sustainability, emphasizes strategies, organizational characteristics,
and personal qualities for action, and established concrete yet
achievable targets for the future: Alleem’s 21 Sustainable Development Goals.
The following provides an overview of the Alleem 21 Sustainable Development Goals:

Goal 1: Quality Education
It is appalling to realize that nearly 103 million youth and
children worldwide lack basic literacy skills, 60% of whom
are women. Dr. Alleem believes firmly that education is a
powerful weapon that can help change the world; however,
that education must be ‘Quality Education.’ He states that one
must learn, and once you have learnt, teach others in turn,
because education is the source of true happiness. He believes
that quality education will help bring remarkable developments at all levels of the system, nurturing leadership skills
and literacy excellence.

80

ALLEEM 21 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

Goal 2: FOSTERING Creativity and Innovation
According to Dr. Alleem, creativity is the ability to develop
something new, while innovation is the execution of these
creative ideas. He states that every individual in this world
has an exceptional gift that is consistent with his philosophy,
which rests on his self-coined term, “the CRItRAL thinking.”
This unique blend of “critical and lateral” thinking will not
just help people achieve the best version of themselves, but
also of their colleagues. He believes that although everyone is
gifted or creative, the key focus remains on one’s perception.

Goal 3: Technology, Research, and Development
Technology has become an indispensable part of our lives, as
it pervades almost every aspect of our work as well as personal lifes. Undoubtedly, without technology, life would be quite
toilsome and onerous. The development of new technology
today has helped people in many aspects; it not only saves
lives, but also helps people make work easier, and the world a
better place in which to live. Technology has opened new avenues in nearly every sector, including education, healthcare,
research and energy studies, environment, and travel.

Goal 4: Peace and Security
The world has become chaotic since 2008, with a deterioration of 2.44 percent in the average country Global Peace Index score. Dr. Alleem believes that it is important that we educate our young generation about the Institute for Economics
and Peace’s eight pillars for positive peace to create a utopian
world that is filled with love, peace, and passion. These Eight
pillars include a government that functions well, sound business environment, equitable distribution of resources, accep-

81

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

tance of the rights of others, good relations with neighbors,
free flow of information, high levels of human capital, and
low levels of corruption.

Goal 5: Tolerance
Millions of people today who live in different parts of the
world have been suffering from hate crimes attributable to
their caste, color, and creed. Human trafficking is also on the
rise and people have stopped feeling the sense of belongingness to the place in which they live. In this growing unrest,
we fail to understand that tolerance is acceptance—accepting and rejoicing in differences—and undoubtedly the UAE
is one of the major examples of tolerance. In 2016, it created
the 1st Ministry of Tolerance in the world and also designated
the year 2019 as the “The Year of Tolerance.”

Goal 6: Happiness
Over the centuries, people have agonized over the question—
What is happiness? Is it simply feeling good about oneself?
Being rich or being able to afford everything in life? Dr. Alleem, who is often recognized as the Ambassador of Peace
and Happiness in the Arab world, defines happiness as the
feeling of being relatively content with yourself and satisfied
with every aspect of your life. He has contributed immensely to the happiness of the UAE and created a motivational
work environment in his organizations. Under his leadership,
SEWA was recognized as one of the happiest places in which
to work. He believes firmly that in addition to GDP, each
country should have the GNH—Growth National Happiness,
following the footsteps of Bhutan, which takes the happiness
of its population as its growth policy.

82

ALLEEM 21 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

Goal 7: Good Health and Well Being
Health is an important facet of sustainable development;
hence, to spread awareness of good health and wellbeing, the
Alleem R&D center has organized the Rashid Alleem Premier
League, or RPL, every year since 2016. This engaging tournament has gained great acceptance now by corporations. In
2020, the RPL was announced as the GCC’s largest corporate
cricket tournament.

Goal 8: Water Sustainability
Water scarcity has reached a critical level. According to UN
statistics, only 2.6 billion people have gained access to improved drinking water sources since 1990, while 663 million
still have no access to it. Further, at least 1.8 billion people all
over the globe use a drinking water source that is contaminated with faeces. Dr. Alleem has worked with various international organizations to find innovative and high-quality solutions for this perilous challenge that the world faces today.
To spread awareness of water sustainability on a larger scale,
Dr. Alleem organizes Water & Energy week, in which more
than 300 participants engage every year. For his pioneering
contributions to this sustainable goal, he was also bestowed
with the Friend of Singapore Sustainability Award 2017 by
the government of Singapore and became a member of the
advisory board of the Singapore World Water Council.

Goal 9: Affordable Energy
With the growing population, the demand for affordable and
clean energy sources has also been on the rise. As climate
change has affected energy resources, it is vital that we change
our ways to achieve this sustainable goal and save our planet.

83

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

To achieve this, Dr. Alleem was able to position Sharjah globally as a city of conservation. He introduced peak hours between 02:30 to 03:30 p.m. on July 1 every year, and to spread
awareness of this initiative, messages were provided through
the media urging the public to avoid using appliances that
consumed more power during those peak hours. SMS messages were also sent to encourage the people to contribute
and participate in this initiative. They created an innovative
character called Peak man for the children to take pictures
and become involved in this excellent initiative. The ultimate
goal of this campaign was to reduce the energy demand by 30
percent during the peak hours. Under his leadership, SEWA
has set international records and is recognized proudly as one
of the most authentic organizations in the world.

Goal: 10 Environment and Natural Resource
Security
Understanding the direct pressures placed on the natural
world, including the water crisis, climate change, and many
more, companies across the globe have incorporated the “Go
Green” concept as one of their organizational policies, and
SEWA is not far behind. Under Dr. Alleem’s astute leadership,
consistent with international standards, SEWA adopted the
green bill strategy to provide easier online services to its 1.5
million customers. Since January 1, 2017, SEWA began to
issue electronic rather than paper bills with the slogan “My
bill is environmentally friendly.” This strategy has saved more
than 600 trees per annum. To pledge its allegiance to the environment, and engage its employees to leave a legacy by planting trees, SEWA also decided to give back to the environment
by planting 600 Prosopis cineraria trees across Sharjah.

84

ALLEEM 21 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

Goal 11: Climate Change
Over the past several decades, the earth’s average temperature has increased by 0.750C, causing heat waves, droughts,
wildfires, storms, and so on that hasn’t just killed people,
but animals and plants, across the globe and led to damages
amounting to hundreds of billions of dollars. To contribute to
global warming and climate change solutions, UAE has created a full-fledged ministry, the Ministry of Climate Change,
and has signed international agreements, including the Paris
agreement.

Goal 12: Financial and Economic Crises
If we reminisce about history, financial crises have had profound effects on people. As it happened to our grandfathers
during the great depression in 1929 and that in 2008 we have
witnessed grave social effects that resulted in the loss of millions of jobs across the globe. Dr. Alleem states that during
such crises, it is important that we change the way we think
and work. All leaders across organizations must demonstrate
steadfast integrity, maintain personal credibility, and possess the ability to confront reality. In short, we must rethink
thinking—rework our work. According to him, financial and
economic crises can be controlled and overcome using good,
authentic leadership and quality directorial skills.

Goal 13: Competitiveness
According to the World Economic Forum, competitiveness is
the set of institutions, policies, and factors that determine the
level of productivity. The 12 pillars of competitiveness that
determine the level of productivity in a country include institutions, infrastructure, macro-economic environment, health

85

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

and primary education, higher education and training, goods
market efficiency, labor market efficiency, a developed financial market, technological readiness, market size, business sophistication, and innovation.

Goal 14: International Trade and Investment
According to Dr. Alleem, if we wish to achieve a peaceful
world, a better tomorrow, and sustained global relationships,
we should elevate the business bar and make better deals. One
of the ways to achieve this is by creating Free Zones. The UAE
has 34 free zones across its seven emirates that have been able
to attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) from more than
200 countries.

Goal 15: Children’s Rights
Every child in this world has the right to have continuous access to basic services and resources, such as safe water, sanitation, adequate nutrition, good health, quality education,
clean air, and energy. According to the International Labour
Organization, 218 million children worldwide between the
ages of 5 and 17 years are employed and among them, 152
million are victims of child labor. It is important that we ensure children’s rights to education, health, and protection
from abuse and exploitation.

Goal 16: Food Security
Agriculture is the single largest employer in the world, providing livelihoods to 40 percent of today’s global population.
In developing countries, 500 million small farms worldwide,
largely still rain-fed, provide up to 80 percent of the food consumed. It has been noted as well that energy poverty in many

86

ALLEEM 21 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

regions is a fundamental barrier to addressing hunger and
ensuring that the world can produce sufficient food to meet
future demands. To address this issue of food security, the
UAE has established a food bank to reduce food waste and
feed needy people in the region and abroad. Here excess food
from hotels, supermarkets, restaurants, and farms is collected, stored, and packaged for distribution. Similarly, to preserve seeds, Sharjah has initiated the Sharjah Seed bank with
the goal to preserve the genetic origins of terrestrial plants
through seed genes.

Goal 17: Extreme Poverty
This goal is consistent with the UN’s strategic vision to eradicate poverty worldwide by 2030; although global poverty
rates have been reduced by more than half since 2000, one in
ten people in developing regions still lives on less than US$
1.90 a day.

Goal 18: Women’s Empowerment
Women’s empowerment and autonomy and the improvement
of their political, social, economic, and health status is a highly important end in itself. The UAE believes firmly that progress on issues related to women’s rights is essential to build a
tolerant and modern society. Since the initial foundation of
the UAE on December 2, 1971, the UAE’s leaders have recognized women as equal partners in national development.

Goal 19: Employment Skills and Human Capital
While employment skills are transferrable skills that an individual requires to be employed, human capital refers to the
collective skills that can be used to create economic value for

87

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

individuals, their employers, or their community to build a
better tomorrow for its citizens and ensure that they have the
correct and necessary skills, tools, and knowledge.

Goal 20: Sustain Inclusive Growth
Inclusive growth signals a process by which economic growth
is generated and distributed in ways that are based broadly
and allows people to create economic growth. Inclusion also
affects social stability and peace in a country. Hence, after extensive research, the Alleem R & D Center developed a model
for inclusive growth that consists of five pillars: leadership;
import knowledge; high savings; infrastructure; and financial
institutions. According to Dr. Alleem, to ensure the success of
the inclusive growth model and guarantee sustained growth,
the following four actors’ roles are important: government
sector; private sector; civil society, and individuals.

Goal 21: International Cooperation
The final goal of the Alleem 21 sustainable development goals
is International Cooperation. Through his Alleem Brilliant
Networking project, Dr. Alleem has been involved with various international organizations and meets various visionary
business and state leaders who are eager to collaborate and
co-create to find new ways to promote the achievement of
strong, inclusive, and sustainable green growth worldwide.
To achieve this ambitious and magnanimous vision, the Alleem R&D Center is proud to have collaborated with over 100
like-minded local, regional, and global brands to cooperate,
co-create, and meet the Alleem 21 Sustainable Development
goals.

88

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Dr. Rashid Alleem is ranked third among the 25 most influential CEOs in the Gulf Cooperation Council and is considered one of the 100 most influential CEOs in the Middle East.
Recently, the Academic College of Oxford, United Kingdom,
honored Dr. Alleem with the title of “Honorary Professor”
in recognition of his scientific, administrative, and humanitarian efforts and contributions, especially in the field of
sustainable development. He is a passionate writer; an environmentalist; a sought-after thought leader; the creator of
CRItRAL Thinking, a unique blend of “critical and lateral”
thinking; and an internationally respected transformational
leader. The founder of Alleem Knowledge Center, Dr. Alleem
is a dynamic leader who has worked with prestigious governmental, semi-governmental, and nonprofit organizations.
He is an entrepreneur par excellence with a flair for effective,
strategic decision-making by means of innovative thinking.
Dr. Rashid was recognized as “The Knowledge Ambassador
of the UAE” by His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid
Al Maktoum—the Vice President and Prime Minister of the
UAE and ruler of the Emirate of Dubai—and as “Environmentalist of the Year 2012” by the fourth Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir Bin Mohamad.

89

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Dr. Alleem earned a Ph.D. from the University of Salford,
in Manchester, UK. Being a “sustainovationalist,” he has received five honorary doctoral degrees from different universities: Atlantic International University (USA), in recognition
of his achievements in the socioeconomic fields; Somalia
National University, for his humanitarian services; American
Global International University (USA), for his global business contributions and numerous academic achievements;
Indian Peace University, from which he received a Doctorate
in Philosophy for his exceptional contributions, dedication,
and social services to society; and Doctor of Philosophy (D.
Phil) from Amity University, in recognition of his exceptional
vision, deep commitment to the environment, professionalism and direction in the pursuit of excellence and his strategic vision and inspirational leadership in steering his organization towards continuous growth and dedication to the
good of humanity.
Dr. Alleem was recently recognized as The Global Green
Ambassador by DMG. Under his leadership, SEWA received
the Voluntary Cancellation Certificate for excellence in energy-saving and the reduction of CO2 emissions by the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2017. He was bestowed with the Friend of Singapore
Sustainability Award 2017 by the government of Singapore,
and he became a member of the advisory board of the Singapore World Water Council. He has received the prestigious
title of “The Ambassador of Peace & Happiness in the Arab
World” by Voice of Kerala Radio Station.
As a highly sought-after keynote speaker, presenter, and
teacher, Dr. Alleem is well-known for delivering compelling

90

and practical messages to audiences of more than 200,000
people per annum, including at some of the largest regional
and international venues.
Last but not least, he is one of the most interviewed and published charismatic media personalities in the region. A prolific writer both in English and Arabic, Dr. Rashid Alleem is the
author of several books on management and leadership. His
newest book, The SEWA Way, showcases 15 winning principles, providing a roadmap for achieving success both on an
organizational and a personal scale. Aiming to improve social, economic, and environmental living conditions worldwide and helping to improve the quality of life for hundreds
of millions who have not yet seen the benefits of sustainable
development and inclusive growth, he has written four books
on the topic of sustainability: My Green Journey in Hamriyah;
Sustainability: The Fourth Wave of Economy; I Am Committed:
17 Global Goals; and Alleem Sustainable Development Goals.
Contact Dr. Rashid Alleem at
rashid@alleem.com
alleemsdg.com
alleemsdg

91

FOSTERING CREATIVITY & INNOVATION

Books by

Dr. Rashid Alleem
On ‘Must Have’ lists

alleembooks@alleem.com

92

www.alleembooks.com

F o s t e r i n g C r e a ti v i t y a n d I n n o v a ti o n
This book is for anyone in any organization, ranging from the CEO to
anyone who is responsible for addressing and solving creative
business challenges and looking for innovative solutions to make a
better tomorrow.
This book will inspire you to dream big.

DON’T MISS THESE OTHER BOOKS

GO TO www.alleembooks.com TO SEE ALL THE BOOKS IN THIS SERIES!

ISBN 978-1-9163363-4-6

9 7 8- 1- 9163363- 4- 6

