Title

i

Title

The SEWA Project
Management
Model
DR. RASHID ALLEEM

ii

Title

SEWA Project Management Model

Alleem Research & Development Center
Tel : +971 6 5689770
Email : abc@alleem.com
P.O. Box 1610, Sharjah UAE
Copyright © Dr. Rashid Alleem 2018. All rights reserved. The right of
Dr. Rashid Alleem to be identified as the Author of this Work.
ISBN : 976-969-9637-42-1
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise,
be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior written
consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and
without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent
purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of
this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronics, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright
owner and the above-mentioned publisher of this book. Any person or a company
who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.

Knowledge Partner:

Supported by:

alleemsdgcom
www.alleemsdg.com
Email: alleem@alleemsdg.com

iii

Title

iv

Title

For my beloved daughters Eman, Reem, and Hind.
May God continue to bless them with peace and grace.

v

Title

ALSO BY DR. RASHID ALLEEM

The SEWA Way
I Am Committed
Is Success a Sin?
Inspirational Stories
New Year Resolutions
My Leadership Secrets
Successful Marketing Plan
The SEWA Marketing Plan
The SEWA Brand Leadership
My Green Journey in Hamriyah
Tolerance-Harmony in Difference
The SEWA Customer-Centric Model
Alleem Sustainable Development Goals
The 13 Critical Traits of Team Dynamics
Sustainability -the Fourth Wave of Economy
The SEWA Brand Turnaround & Rejuvenation

For free download and more information about the above books, contact:
Alleem Knowledge Center
abc@alleem.com
www.alleem.com

vi

Title

CONTENTS

ix

Foreword
Introduction
How To Read This Book

1
3

Part One: A Thorough Turnaround

4
13

What to Do

24

My Priority
Projects, Projects, And Projects
The Iron Triangle

29
32
37

Do Us A Flavor

41

Brand With Potential

46

Shoshin

48

Room Of Possibilities

54

Stay Eager
Implement A Change Program

58

Part Two: The Sewa Project Management Model

63

Performance Monitoring

67

The Secret

70

Go/No-Go Decisions

72

Stage 1: Imagineering

76

Stage 2: Ecomagination

89
93

Stage 3: CRItRAL Thinking
Stage 4: Execution

108

Stage 5: Knowledge Capture and Storage

124

The Way Forward
Acknowledgments
About The Author

131
133
134

vii

Title

The SEWA Project
Management
Model

viii

Title

Foreword

His Excellency Dr. Rashid Alleem understands how to breathe life
into organizations. He does that by challenging the status quo and
by inspiring those around him. Change is never easy. Most people
fear it. However, His Excellency knows that an organization that will
adapt is one that will thrive.
Prior to his arrival, Sharjah Electricity and Water Authority, or
SEWA, was in disrepair. His Excellency recognized that the only way
to reverse the negative trend at SEWA was to alter the institutional
culture. The financial losses, low morale, and lack of customer trust
occurred because the old system prevented anyone from becoming
a stakeholder in the organization’s success. In order to reverse the
course and meet the challenge assigned by His Highness Sheikh Dr.
Sultan Bin Mohammed Al Qasimi, His Excellency needed to change
SEWA’s routine.
Change can be risky. Those that propose change are often questioned. Internally, doubt is common amongst the people that we try
to lead. Externally, critics will focus on anything negative to undermine a leader’s efforts to pioneer new practices. But a true leader must
have the courage to risk failure.
Courage is not the absence of fear. Courage is the willingness to
persevere despite being afraid. A leader has not demonstrated courage
until they have accepted risk. This is the difference between an actual
leader and a career administrator.
Another sign of leadership is strength. But that doesn’t mean that
a leader must bear the weight of an organization on their own back.
The most effective leaders are ones that leverage the capabilities of
their own people. When barriers are eliminated and collaboration

ix

CONTENTS

Foreword
Title

is embraced, ideas flourish. His Excellency recognized this. He
recruited new talent to integrate with legacy workers. He broke down
horizontal departments and vertical command barriers. He created a
safe environment to share inventive thoughts. This not only enhances
communication, but it also enables all employees to feel vested as
contributors to the improvements in the organization.
Like His Excellency, my approach to funding infrastructure is to
proactively embrace innovation. When I first arrived at Johnson Controls, the JCI Structured Finance business was stationary. It had a
traditional way to do business and lacked innovation. It passively
waited to follow the market and struggled to keep pace. We changed
all of that.
Now it’s part of our mission to be creative. We think less about
the financial services that Johnson Controls wants to supply and more
about what our customers demand. We seek to understand our customers. To use a medical phrase, we prefer to diagnose the ailment
before we prescribe the medicine. At the same time, we collaborate
both internally and externally. This communication has inspired innovation. His Excellency shares the same philosophy. Readers of
The SEWA project management model will learn from His Excellency’s
management approach and can hopefully implement a similar style in
their own organizations.

Ben Speed
Global Executive Director
Structured Finance
Johnson Controls International,USA

x

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
Survive and Thrive

“Only those leaders who act boldly in times of crisis and change are
willingly followed.”
Jim Kouzes

Making Things Happen
My favorite word in the English language is ‘how.’ How does this
work? How was this made? How did they do this? Whenever I see
something interesting happen, I’m filled with insightful questions
that involve this small but powerful little word. I have this incurable
desire to pick the brains of people I meet. Most of the answers I find
center on how people apply their own intelligence and wisdom rather
than their knowledge of specific technologies or theories. After 15
years of building/creating things and comparing my experiences to
those of others in the field of project management, I’ve learned how
to manage projects well. This book is a summation of those ideas.
It includes approaches for leading teams, working with ideas,
organizing projects, managing schedules, dealing with politics, and
making things happen—even in the face of great challenges and unfair situations.
Unlike some other books on how to lead projects, this book doesn’t
ascribe to any grand theory or presumptively philosophy. Instead, I’ve

1

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project
Management Model
Introduction

placed my bet on innovation, practicality, and diversity. In fact,
project management skills are not so esoteric that only geniuses can
master them. All of us can learn them and excel at project management, and that is what this book is about. Projects result in good
things when the right combination of people, skills, attitudes, and
tactics is applied, regardless of their origin or (lack of ) pedigree. I’ve
wagered heavily on picking the right topics and giving good advice
over all other considerations. I hope you find that I’ve made the right
choice!
This inspiring and practical guidebook is based on my own
personal leadership principles I lived and practiced at SEWA, but you
won’t find these principles in any official SEWA guide to leadership
success. These principles can, hopefully, help you find your own
authentic voice, success, and fulfillment. This is important and the
soul of this book.
This book contains a treasury of lessons and techniques that will
benefit project teams of any experience level. The lessons in this book
are easy to read, understand, and apply—and they will help you not
only survive but also thrive in today’s project management world. It
can also help you avoid the kinds of mistakes that will derail you.
Surely, the above may have caught your attention and kept you
reading until this point. Now, let me take you to a flashback. Rewind
your clock to the spring of 2014, when I zigged and zagged my way
to success.
In the first few pages, I’ll explain what the whole book is about.
Turn the page to find out more.

2

CONTENTS

HOW TO READ THIS BOOK

Your aim should be to make The SEWA Project Management Model a
part of your daily projects (big or small). I urge you to read this book
slowly and then reread it. Dog-ear the pages that you might want to
revisit or find interesting.
Take it all in. Throughout the text, I have provided famous quotes
where I invite you to pause, review, and contemplate. However, you
don’t necessarily have to pause after each quote. Just get a global sense
of the entire story we are telling.
I urge you to give The SEWA Project Management Model a test
drive and make it your own. Work toward letting the model become
second nature. I encourage you to revisit chapters again and again—
different elements will resonate with you at different times. The more
you absorb and practice these elements of The SEWA Project Management Model, the more you will get out of them.
The SEWA Project Management Model is unique in that it isn’t
about outdated theories or philosophical ideas. Instead, it is simply
packed with tips, powerful stories, and motivational quotes that I’ve
gathered and used in my personal and professional life. They have
made a huge difference for me, and they can do the same for you and
your team in a sustainable way.
And yes, once you’ve mastered the model, feel free to pass this
book on to someone you know who needs it or donate it to the local
library. As Homer said, “The charity that seems trifle to us may seem
precious to others.”
Enjoy!

3

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

A THOROUGH TURNAROUND
Against the Clock

“All the world’s a stage, And all the men and women merely players.
They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time
plays many parts, His acts being seven ages.”
William Shakespeare

A Serious Problem
APRIL 22, 2014: It would be a day like no other in Sharjah’s history. Unsurprisingly, more than 1.5 million of Sharjah’s residents were
soon asking the obvious questions: Who is this Rashid Alleem? Why
him? And where on earth did he come from?
No, you haven’t picked up the wrong book mistakenly; this isn’t a
book about my career or my personal achievements. It’s neither an autobiography nor a biography. It’s about business, specifically the way
organizations can learn faster and become more agile and competitive
when the customer is the focal point. The book contains a great deal
of useful lessons from my many successes and a few failures and how
to handle them. And boy, did I learn from my mistakes—over and
over again.

The Turning Point
Monday, April 21, 2014, was a historical and momentous day in my
life. It was 3 p.m., and I was in the middle of a late lunch with my
4

CONTENTS

A Thorough Turnaround

beloved family when I received a call from the executive office of His
Highness Sheikh Dr. Sultan Bin Mohammad Al Qassimi, a member
of the Supreme Council of the United Arab Emirates and the President of Sharjah, stating that His Highness had chosen me, exclusively,
to chair the Sharjah Electricity and Water Authority (SEWA). SEWA
provides electricity, water, and gas to the entire city of Sharjah. His
Highness’s decision was based on his displeasure with the previous
management’s performance, both financially and administratively.
Furthermore, His Highness believed I could make things like no one
else. The call was a huge surprise! I could not believe my own ears and
was speechless for a moment. I could not even enjoy the rest of my
lunch.
To put it bluntly, the position would mean more responsibility and
a new challenge, but I wondered if it was right for me. It introduced
a degree of uncertainty that required a different kind of leadership. As
His Highness believes, “Till the last man in the last village is happy,
the work of the government is not done.”

A Decision Based on Intuition
I was asked if I would accept this daunting task. It was not a good time
for me to make a quick decision, as I was preparing for the sixth annual
leadership and management congress the following morning, which one
of my non-profit organizations, Alleem Business Congress, had organized. I was at sixes and sevens!
I consulted with good friends and colleagues, 99% of whom told
me I shouldn’t accept the position: “big no, you can’t do that”; “it’s
not plain sailing”; “it’s a very complicated world out there”; “it’s going
to be your Waterloo.” Scenarios like these often bring feelings of isolation and fear. However, deep inside me, there was a voice that said
yes, definitely yes, the most powerful word in the world. With an ‘I
believe I can do it’ mindset, I accepted the appointment because it
came directly from the President of the Sharjah Government, whom I
love and respect for who he is and his leadership philosophies.

5

CONTENTS

The SEWA
Project Management
Model
A Thorough
Turnaround

There was no doubt in my mind that SEWA’s transformation
would be difficult, but someone had to do it and do it well. Despite
all the confusion and uncertainty, I followed my intuition and decided
to accept the position. I was committed, emotionally and intellectually, to do all I could to help it succeed. We all know that ‘with God,
all things are possible.’

Executive Order
Without delay, the very next day, the executive order of my appointment as the new Chairman of SEWA was given and issued, but not
made public, because His Highness wanted to see me personally first
and share his words of wisdom. Indeed, my mind was full of thoughts
and big ideas, as I thought to myself, Transformation cannot happen
without emotional investment. How will I frame my transformation
game plan and present its roadmap? What will I do first? What are my
top priorities?

Zero Hour
His Highness wanted to meet with me at 9 a.m. the following morning to appoint me as the new chairman officially. I still remember that
defining moment when he signed the executive order in front of me
and issued it to the public. This act was followed by a private meeting
in his office, where he gave me some personal directions and instructions, explaining the way forward. Almost before the ink was dry on
the executive order, the news spread like wildfire and was soon the
talk of the entire country. As the announcement reached the blogosphere and other social media channels, it gained momentum and was
tweeted and retweeted thousands and thousands of times, acquiring
traffic even through my personal Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and
Instagram accounts.
It was decided that I was to report to His Highness directly
without intervening board members to ensure speedy and efficient

6

CONTENTS

A Thorough Turnaround

decision making. SEWA’s performance had to improve rapidly to
rescue the authority from expected bankruptcy—a struggling brand
in obvious decline. The transformation must be both bold and rapid
to be successful. The story is interesting in itself, despite the odds.
How, then, did I save SEWA from its brush with bankruptcy?
Well, I took an approach that has not been discussed and codified
in the business literature, and the goal of this book is to define and
explain the approach. I assure you, if applied appropriately, this approach can help recover any organization of any size. It wasn’t all a
matter of clearing the decks, though. I had to immerse myself in the
world of SEWA, a highly bureaucratic, slow moving, hierarchical, and
complex organization.

Making a Commitment to Lead
There was no turning back and no backpedaling. Surely, this event
was a turning point in my life. I felt thrown into a moment of truth,
and indeed, it was a transformational moment. I recognized that this
was going to be the most difficult assignment I had ever been asked to
do, which was self-evident, as His Highness had given me the responsibility personally. I knew that right then and there, I was re-defining
myself. His Highness’s order definitely filled me with pangs of inner
conflict. One voice beckoned me back to the security of my comfort zone, yet another pulled me forward so powerfully that I simply
couldn’t say no to realize the business’ continued prosperity.

It’s Lonely at the Top
We can either keep on cruising along the same old track, or we can
veer off the path and forge our own trail. I told myself, Rashid, it’s
time you write a brand-new script for your business life. Just go that extra
mile...but remember, that extra mile is a lonely place.
I thought, “Every person needs his or her own personal proving
place, and this is mine. I’m here!” I like what the philosopher William

7

CONTENTS

The SEWA
Project Management
Model
A
A Thorough
Thorough
Turnaround
Turnaround

James once said, “Seek out that particular mental attitude which
makes you feel deeply and vitally alive, along with which comes the
inner voice which says, ‘this is the real me,’ and when you have found
that attitude, follow it.”
However, when I was starting out, I scrambled around for advice,
data, or anything else that might help me to rock the boat.
It was one of those daring moments when life called to me, “Well,
here’s your chance. Show me what you have.” Well, I am not a debutant!
I have experienced many of these dramatic shifts over the past two
decades. My daring moments have been turning points. Hence, I took
the plunge. It was inevitable that I would have to struggle against a
myriad of obstacles and challenges to restore the authority’s image
and reinstate its honorable position in the country. Doing so required
significant internal cultural and brand changes.

Taking Charge
Leading can be a strenuous mental and physical activity, and I wanted
to be engaged in it fully, not peripherally. I wanted to have a real influence on SEWA, where I could see the direct results of my actions. I
always believe that if you are going to do something, you must make
a total commitment to the task at hand. I wanted to make a commitment not only to save the business but also turn it around so that it
became highly profitable.
When I took the helm at SEWA, the organization desperately
needed a leader who could set the agenda and point the organization
in the right direction. His Highness wanted me to be the ‘Mr. Fix-It,’
who could do both of these things.
I concluded that SEWA could be prepared for the future only
through a complete overhaul of its management processes and a topto-bottom transformation of its culture. As a leader, my primary responsibilities are to set the direction and remove the roadblocks so
that the organization and its people succeed, and this doesn’t happen
when people think what they’re doing is meaningless.

8

CONTENTS

A Thorough Turnaround

Break the Rules
SEWA had adopted a command and control management style, and
teamwork didn’t exist. The place was managed with an iron fist. I
wanted to use a new language of leadership to create a professionally
managed firm where making decisions is delegated to the right people
and where participation on the part of many levels of management is
encouraged. I saw the need for a system that would allow me to draw
upon the knowledge, talents, and judgment of others in the organization, a system that gives us the opportunity to tap into the creative
powers of everyone in the organization. I also wanted to create a more
agile and streamlined SEWA. The management rules and culture that
had worked earlier had become a handicap, and speed is a valuable
feature. As the saying goes, I was skating on thin ice.
I knew that I had to break the ‘golden rules.’ I don’t mean to do
or suggest anything unethical or illegal. Instead, I mean advocating
the need to change habit patterns, break familiar rhythms, and turn
stones that ‘shouldn’t’ be turned. There were patterns and anchors in
the organization that somehow had evolved into ‘holy rules.’

Do I Have What it Takes?
I believe that it takes courage to break the rules, and when you begin
to change the way things have been done for years, you need confidence that what you’re doing is right. You also must be committed
because people will make fun of you or challenge your ability by saying, “You’re totally wrong,” and “This is how we’ve always done it.”
However, I say, “Life is tough, and dreams do often come true. And
I’m a dreamer. I always want to dream big. But, we need to remember
that dreams are not a blueprint; they simply provide a vision. It is the
starting point. Without a dream, we have no direction. As the old
expression says, ‘If you don’t know where you’re going, any path will
get you there.’ ”

9

CONTENTS

The SEWA
Project Management
Model
A
A Thorough
Thorough
Turnaround
Turnaround

The Seeds of Change
Change has to start somewhere, and I wanted to transform behaviors
and achieve results. Leading has its own language. At last count, there
are roughly five thousand languages spoken in the world today, and
the language that crosses all borders, cultures, industry types, and organizational sizes is the language of results-oriented leadership. When
you know exactly what you want, believe in yourself, and have a plan
of action, the potential for success becomes limitless. When you’re
clear about what success means to you, opportunities will present
themselves, new doors will open, and to your amazement, anything
will be possible.
All of this convinced me that it was time for a change in management and process reengineering. It was time to approach the project
strategy in a different way and transform SEWA processes from mechanical activity to something deeper and more meaningful immediately, as in overnight!

A Hodgepodge
To add to the challenges mentioned above, SEWA had deeper issues.
In addition to overrun projects and poor project execution, the brand
was murdered through mismanagement. This added to the list of never-ending challenges. Throughout the book, you will find out how I
dealt with the other nine in more detail. The top nine challenges I had
to face at the outset are as follows:
1. US $4 billion in debt.
2. Creditors wanted payment for goods and services that had been
delivered a long time ago.
3. An over-staffed and under-skilled workforce of about 5,500
employees.
4. Very low staff morale.

10

CONTENTS

A Thorough Turnaround

5. Unfair and misleading pricing strategies.
6. Aging power plants, equipment, and substations (phase-out
was needed).
7. Very high interest rates for the existing bank loans (as high as
9%).
8. Good employees wanted to retain their jobs and benefits.
9. Most importantly, overrun projects, mainly due to fuzzy objectives.

Focus Your Attention
“Concentrate all your thoughts on the task at hand.
The sun’s rays do not burn until brought into focus.”
Alexander Graham Bell

These challenges can be at odds with one another and hamper the
project management efforts. I knew that my attention needed to be
focused on all nine areas. Humans are simply more efficient and effective when they concentrate. Norman Vincent Peale once said,
“When every physical and mental resource is focused,
one’s power to solve multiplies tremendously.”
On top of these challenges was SEWA’s frustrated customers, who felt
misled, mistreated, and ignored.
I threw myself into the job and gave it my full attention. I was passionate about everything. I wanted to be the best, serve the best, and
do the best. My passion showed in everything I did. I always believe
that however bad it may seem, we always get over it eventually. I was
emotionally involved.
SEWA’s turnaround was the most impactful, biggest, and quickest
transformation that I have ever managed. SEWA went from the worst
to the best performing government authority in the Middle East. The
financial results and service performance were outstanding. A sweeping change like this takes commitment, persistence, and time.
11

CONTENTS

The SEWA
Project Management
Model
A
A Thorough
Thorough
Turnaround
Turnaround

If you’d like to create the same kind of turnaround, you have come
to the right place. Together, we will go on a journey of transformation.

12

CONTENTS

CHAPTER ONE

What to Do
“All serious daring starts from within.”
Eudora Welty

If you ask any project manager about the challenges one might face in
the industry, a typical list will look like this:
• Insufficient commitment from project sponsors.
• Unclear requirements/scope.
• Inexperienced team members.
• Poor planning.
• Lack of formal project management processes.
• Cultural issues.
• Unclear roles of team members, including that of the project
manager.
• Inadequate communication.
The smorgasbord of challenges listed above were not unknown
to SEWA. In fact, SEWA was mired in the quicksand of challenges,
stuck in a mucky substance, and sinking down into the muck.

13

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

If you ask any project manager about the challenges one might face in
the industry, a typical list will look like this:
• Insufficient commitment from project sponsors.
• Unclear requirements/scope.
• Inexperienced team members.
• Poor planning.
• Lack of formal project management processes.
• Cultural issues.
• Unclear roles of team members, including that of the project
manager.
• Inadequate communication.
The smorgasbord of challenges listed above were not unknown
to SEWA. In fact, SEWA was mired in the quicksand of challenges,
stuck in a mucky substance, and sinking down into the muck.

Overcoming the Obstacles
Being on a roll in ‘do mode’ is a wonderful feeling. At first, it seemed
like a nightmare that was much too big to handle! Then, I remembered
that most opportunities come wrapped in a black box labeled ‘problem.’ I zeroed in on two things that would enable me to transform the
organization’s project management office: (1) bring the authority up
to His Highness’s expectations, and (2) please the society by striking
the right balance between the organization’s commercial and social
obligations. It can feel like being caught in powerful cross-currents. I
was in a race against time.

Where the Change Starts
Based on my previous business turnarounds and experiences with
other organizations over the past twenty years, I thought the most

14

CONTENTS

What To Do

important step to start with was establishing a set of core values and
guiding principles to help us navigate through the turbulent times.
I wanted to identify all the limiting factors that could hamper my
focus. In fact, I wanted to focus all of my energies on alleviating that
single choke point.
There is no doubt that values and timeless principles matter in
managing change and turnarounds!
I thought to myself, first, we must walk the talk. We should ask
ourselves whether the things we do every day match who we are and
who we want to be. Second, we needed a successful project management model in place to execute and sustain our projects. However,
this caused me to say to myself, Will it be easy? Do I have the ability to
change things more dramatically than ever before in the history of SEWA?
Does it mean I will have to work eight days a week?
Let’s find out the answers!

From ‘Me’ to ‘We’
As Halford E. Luccock, a prominent American Methodist minister
stated,
“No one can whistle a symphony.
It takes a whole orchestra to play it.”
I told myself, Nobody exists in a vacuum — and nobody succeeds in one
either. At this moment, a friend’s advice echoed in my mind; “To pull
yourself up by the bootstraps and forge your own path is noble but
hardly anyone does it alone. There is an African proverb that says,
“If you want to go fast, go alone.
If you want to go far, go together.”
You need other partners, smart hires, advisors, mentors, and even
stories of people who have already done it before. My ultimate goal
was to be a leader who people would be proud to follow, not one
people have to follow.

15

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

It was not an easy moment. The challenges ahead of me were
mighty—mammoth in size—and time galloped by.
I have been an ardent believer in teaming up. However, I believe
that the simpler your view of what you do, the more power and focus
you will have in doing it. Therefore, I am sharing simple fundamentals that I’ve adhered to all my life to make teamwork work. Don’t be
misled. Simple doesn’t mean easy!

Do I Really Need a Leadership Team?
This is, perhaps, a very important question in this chapter. Success is
never achieved by leadership alone. Throughout my business life, the
maximum number of members I have included in a project leadership
team is nine, and I love calling them the nine champions. I always
advise not having more than nine diverse, knowledgeable, skilful, and
smart employees who have a hunger for creativity and possess the ‘passion to win for the customers.’

Hire Great People
A good leader ensures that he is surrounded by the right people,
whose strengths balance out his weaknesses. I am highly inspired by
Peter Drucker’s famous quote,
“The task of leadership is to create an alignment of
strengths, making our weaknesses irrelevant.”
Each team member has a unique role, abilities, accountability, and responsibility to energize SEWA’s culture. My secret for selecting them
is simple. They are nice, hard-working, ambitious, disciplined, and
well-educated. Among the nine, I have included people who are wise
and have considerable experience working under difficult conditions
and overcoming SEWA’s old ‘ this is how it’s always been done around
here’ culture.
I ardently believe that project management requires an expert
project team that looks ahead to anticipate issues and risks and then
16

CONTENTS

What To Do

mitigate them before they have an effect on projects. Therefore,
choosing the right team and keeping it humming is crucial. Yes, even
more crucial than making heads or tails of Gantt and PERT charts.

Stop for a Moment
One important point here is that I always include the trouble-makers
or resistive ones, whatever you may call them, on my team. It’s convenient to surround ourselves with agreeable news and amicable people who share our worldview. However, I would recommend shunning your believers. Resist the urge to sand off the edges and fit in. Go
for misfits! I am very fond of Steve Jobs’ famous quote that glorifies
the nutty ones:
“Here’s to the crazy ones, the misfits, the rebels, the troublemakers, the round pegs in the square holes...the ones who see
things differently—they’re not fond of rules...You can quote
them, disagree with them, glorify or vilify them, but the
only thing you can’t do is ignore them because they change
things...they push the human race forward, and while some
may see them as the crazy ones, we see genius, because the
ones who are crazy enough to think that they can change the
world, are the ones who do.”

The Super-Chicken Model
There’s something alluring—and commonsensical—about the notion
that if you have just enough A-players in an organization, you’ll succeed. One management theorist called this ‘the super-chicken model,’ where you collect as many status-striving, alpha types as possible.
While a few A-players can be enormously helpful, it’s possible that
success is not about out-hiring the competition for these people. It is
more about the way you form teams, and then, the way people work
together as teams. In short, while we need to take race, gender, and
other issues into account to create diverse teams, we also need diversity in status.
17

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

If a team includes too many high-status people—‘stars’ or ‘A-players,’ as they are known more commonly—they will compete for social
standing and fail to consider others’ ideas. To make matters worse, the
more status people have, the more they crave it, according to University of California-Berkeley social psychologist Cameron Anderson. He
refers to it as the ‘drug-like effects’ of status, and it’s ruinous effects on
collaboration. The other A-player extreme is they make all the decisions, plan all the action, and then tell everybody what to do.

‘It’s a Small World’ Team
When it comes to team building, I live by my definition of a team,
which is, “A team is a selected group of people with different abilities,
talents, experiences, and backgrounds who have come together for
a shared purpose. Despite their individual differences, the common
goal provides the thread that defines them as a team.” Remember,
when your team is motivated and unified, they’ll do some things differently. They’ll stay passionate and focused throughout the project
lifecycle. I believe when unified people are given a clear, meaningful,
purpose, they are able to move forward faster, overcoming challenges
even when the leaders are absent.
I have always surrounded myself with a team of hard-charging
managers who shared both my values and work ethic. I want people who dare to be different. They challenge your thinking, fuel your
ideas, boost your competitive edge, and make you and your business
a winner. By surrounding myself with such competent people, I was
able to focus on the big picture while others helped with daily operations. I experienced higher morale, more enthusiasm, and speeder
decision making.
The late American anthropologist Margaret Mead once said,
“Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed,
citizens,can change the world, it is the only
thing that ever has.”

18

CONTENTS

What To Do

I have never been in a big group that worked well. It’s more likely to
spark controversy than closeness. Countless studies have shown the
benefits of smaller teams. Most teams struggle simply because they are
too large. I like what Jeff Bezos said,
“If you can’t feed the team with two pizzas, it’s too large.”
In summary, a leadership team should consist of a small group of
people who are responsible, collectively, for achieving a common
objective for their organization. A smaller group really is the best way
to become connected on a deeper level with other people on the team.
I have always believed in a small team, in which every member stays
involved all the way through a project. It also is easy to transfer your
vision to a small team. The questions you have to ask yourself are as
follows:
1. What do I want them to know?
2. What do I want them to do?
3. What do I want them to achieve?
The result is fewer mistakes, higher efficiency, and greater productivity.

What it Takes to Make Them Great
First and foremost, while forming a winning team, I look for nine
basic attributes. Throughout my life, I have formed successful teams
by implementing the following basic nine tenets of team formulation:
1. Vision and Purpose—Where is the team going? And why?
2. Passion—Passion and passionate energy. They move and they
see opportunity.
3. Shared values—Passionate about the work they are doing.
4. Goal—Have a clear common goal.

19

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

5. Size—Have the smallest number of people possible on board.
6. Thinkers—Right-brain thinkers and left-brain thinkers.
7. Shared Roles—Hold them accountable. Avoid finger pointing,
misunderstandings, and stepping on others’ toes.
8. Leadership—Inspire teams to accomplish tasks.
9. Stay focused—Strive to achieve and say no to any activity that
would divert their efforts.
While these kinds of attributes seem obvious in retrospect, time and
again, I see leaders overlooking them. Once you’ve followed these tenets, be assured that the team is primed to hammer away at any obstacle. They can ‘wring the towel’ and get the last ounce of possibility out
of any idea.

Unbeatable Team
However, there is an effective formula for hiring: focus on multi-ability people who share the company’s values and principles. They’re the
ones who will not only fit into the culture but also strengthen it. Andy
Lansing, the CEO of Levy Restaurants, says, “Levy has a non-traditional approach to hiring. I hire for two traits—I hire for nice, and I
hire for passion . . . if you give me someone who is nice and passionate, I can teach them everything else . . . if you give me someone with
those two traits, they will, nine out of ten times, be a great success in
the company.” I couldn’t agree more.

The Nine Champions: The Winning Team
I cannot emphasize enough how important the selection and sorting
out of people is. I once said in an interview, “We hire for attitude, not
aptitude.” Personality matters. Once again, we’re in the business of
enriching lives. There is the saying,
“Birds of a feather flock together.”
20

CONTENTS

What To Do

I am constantly in search of people who have a passion to serve with
a larger purpose. By structuring the company this way, I am putting
SEWA’s core cultural values front and center. These core values are
proving to be a magnet for the ‘right’ employees—those who, in turn,
help enrich the organization’s culture.
It didn’t surprise me to see Jeff Weiner, the CEO at LinkedIn, leave
a post on LinkedIn on October 27, 2018, declaring that the jobs of
the future require two major attributes—soft skills and empathy. He
argued that artificial intelligence (AI) can accomplish everything that
humans can do (including coding), but robots can’t equip themselves
with team synthesizing qualities or communication skills. Therefore,
creating a company culture is a very important step to ensure a successful turnaround and transformation for any business.
When I was almost finished writing this paragraph, I came across a
book entitled, Tough Calls from the Corner Office. I was quite intrigued
with the review of this book because it claimed to offer invaluable
insights into the minds of CEOs. The book looked promising to me,
and honestly speaking, it was consistent with my thoughts about the
importance of the corporate culture inside any organization. Below
is one of my favorite paragraphs from the book, where the author
describes the meaning of corporate culture as the following:
Corporate culture is a company’s value system, its DNA, its
personality. Corporate culture defines the shared goals that
drive executives as well as rank-and-file employees. It determines which behaviors are acceptable and which are not. It
encompasses a code of conduct that people intuitively draw
upon when they deal with fellow employees inside the company and with customers or vendors outside of it. If you
ever hear someone say, ‘That kind of approach is encouraged
here,’ or, ‘That would never fly here,’ the speaker is probably
referring to the company’s culture. Corporate culture starts
from the top and is driven by management into all the nooks
and crannies of the organization.

21

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Who’s Who in SEWA Project Management
To meet our SEWA project objectives, I needed the right people on
board with talent, energy, and optimism who also had a clear understanding of their roles. Good people are valuable beyond measure.
Here’s a breakdown of who does what. Let’s get to know the nine
project champions and their basic roles:
1. The chief imagineering officer promotes a blend of imagination
and engineering by ensuring that the team applies whole-brain
thinking to projects.
2. The chief flexitricity officer ensures that the team has clear
objectives and that everyone is involved and committed.
3. The chief efficienology officer questions effectiveness and
presses for continuous improvement and results.
4. The chief greenification officer urges the team to get on with
the job at hand and performs practical tasks.
5. The chief design-thinking officer generates carefully considered
ideas and weighs and refines others’ ideas.
6. The chief culture officer eases tension, helps address personal
agendas or conflicts, makes things easier, and maintains harmony.
7. The chief sustainalytics officer maintains schedules and ensures
that all members stay on the same page.
8. The chief FinTech officer advises the team about any risks that
may arise along the way.
9. The chief SHEngineering officer provides inspiration and can
view situations and opportunities with innate simplicity.
As evident above, the SEWA project management team was diverse.
Diversity within teams creates a paradox as it has been demonstrated
that diverse teams have better performance; this team was unique and
extraordinary because it could do the following:

22

CONTENTS

What To Do

• Spot problems early.
• Make needed changes quickly.
• Trust the emergent process.
• Embrace the highest good.
This special team is chaired by me. Each of the team members reports to me directly. Being the chairperson, my province is to provide
resources, remove roadblocks, and make tough decisions to control
risk and minimize uncertainty, as well as determine when to disband
the team.

One Note of Caution
Free riders. Have you ever heard about them? No? Let me tell you
who they are and give you a little warning about them. These are team
members who obtain the benefits of membership without doing their
share of the work. It’s probably the ultimate reason why the SEWA
project’s nine champions are given specific and unique job titles and
roles. Over the years, I have experienced project team members who
initially show excitement about adding value to the project, but the
energy soon fizzes, and they turn into free riders —these team members cannot be tolerated.
The heart of any project, and the true engine of its work, is its
team members, which is why bringing together the right people is
extremely important. As you read the book, you will discover that I
had to add some new team members and bid good-bye to others over
time as tasks and needs changed.
One may ask, is this the end-all and be-all? Handpick the best
minds of your organization, and they, in turn, whip up successful
projects for you?
We’ll find out in the following chapters.

23

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER TWO

My Priority
“A good plan implemented today is better than
a perfect plan implemented tomorrow.”
George Patton

My priority was productivity—the ability to organize existing
resources to get more output. And to my belief, positivity breeds
productivity.

Tools for the Journey
After setting distinct and definitive priorities for the team and assigning duties, obligations, and responsibilities, I wanted to pick
up the right tools to help the team achieve its mission and goals.
We worked on our software and hardware needs. We asked our
IT department, the ‘Deep Divers Team,’ to determine our computer requirements. I knew then that I needed to keep going; I
couldn’t wait for the perfect moment to come, as the saying goes,
“If you wait for the perfect conditions,
you will never get anything done.”

This is another example of ‘taking care of the champions.’ I had
to give my champions the tools they needed to get their job done,
as well as improve their productivity and overall performance.
24

CONTENTS

My Priority

Managing for Success
It was an early Sunday morning in March in Sharjah, the cultural capital of the UAE. On that day, I had called a meeting of senior managers
to unveil my new project management model.
Hence, I started with positive surroundings. I invited the team for
breakfast. I’d been a frequent visitor to Al Rawi book cafe, a bookshop
cafe that honors storytellers and their tales. The café is situated at the Al
Majaz waterfront, a prime location known for its lush green landscapes
and mouthwatering eateries, undoubtedly why it’s also described as the
heart of Sharjah city.
I wanted to have a very candid discussion with the team under the
theme ‘can we save SEWA’s waning reputation in project management?’
Primarily, I wanted to listen to and act on the insights of my young
team and hoped to benefit from their ambition. This also meant giving
the young guns plenty of opportunity to tackle projects that have a significant effect on the community.
To make them feel at home and at ease, I welcomed them all with an
ear to ear smile.
“What a wonderful, beautiful, marvelous day,” I said. While looking
into their faces, I continued, “A very good morning to all of you.”
They responded, “A very good morning to you too, sir.”
I greeted them. “Feel proud of yourselves. Each one of you is special.”
I continued, “SEWA considers you to be champions. I trust your ability
to make a difference in managing our projects.”
I could see the young team getting infused with zeal and gusto.
“You’ve been selected, rather exclusively chosen to confront the mammoth-size obstacles and challenges involved in completing our projects.
It’s no secret that things aren’t going well around here; our performance
numbers and statistics, across the board, are terrible, and customers
are unhappy. Our projects are underperforming.” I stopped for a few
seconds and then continued, “So, I’ve decided to tighten things up by
implementing a new management system that I call authentic. Let me
tell you how it works. I’ll walk you through my personal philosophy of
defining an authentic vision, which I always like to call a ‘true vision’.”

25

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

They were all ears.
“We’ve heard business leaders talking about their organization’s
visions,” Jose, the chief FinTech officer said. “What’s new about ‘true
vision?”

My True Vision Philosophy
I smiled and answered, “Almost all business leaders have a vision to
lead their unit towards success, but very few have what I call a true
vision.”
“But how do we define it?” the chief culture officer asked.
I answered, “A true vision is when your heart carries your values,
beliefs, timeless principles, and fundamentals, which work alongside
your mind, where business objectives, performance, and challenges
are carried. In this case, your mind acts like a manager in a system,
while your heart acts as a leader on the system. Thus, true leadership
is a robust and dynamic process; a dance between two poles, each taking the lead, each following the other, but it is the heart that molds,
interprets, communicates, and portrays the vision.”
I looked around and asked, “Got it?”
“Nice philosophy, I like it,” the chief FinTech officer said.
I continued, “So, brace up, you’ll have to use your elbow grease.
You will all have to sweat it out day in and day out. Are you all ready
for the everyday hard work and to thrive on the challenges ahead of
you?”
Kumar, the chief design-thinking officer immediately spoke first.
“Sir, we are grateful to have been your preferred choice. It seems
that you have selected us to overcome Herculean stumbling blocks.”
“I appreciate your feelings,” I acquiesced. “Rest assured that we
are gathered here for a special reason. It’s about our project’s performance.”
“Wow, that’s fantastic. We are really excited about today’s meeting,” May, the chief imagineering officer, said with a smile.
“Can’t bear this suspense anymore, sir? Jose added.

26

CONTENTS

My Priority

I smiled and said, “All right. Now, raise your hands if you’ve been
involved in any of SEWA’s projects recently, regardless of whether
they are technical or non-technical, big or small.”
I could sense that a couple of them were hesitant to raise their
hands.
Sensing their skepticism, I said, “There is no blame-game here.
You must move out of your comfort zone into your discomfort zone.
Speak freely. Today is your day. Have your say.”
Their faces brightened, and all of them raised their hands!
My face lit up with excitement.
“Got it? Great,” I continued. “Bravo! I was expecting this,” I said.
“Now, coming back to SEWA’s projects, tell me, how many of these
projects have been completed on time and reaped satisfactory results?”
All hands came down fast. Very fast.
I said, “This explains it all. This is the very reason why we’ve gathered here. You all are involved in projects, but none of you have an exciting or a satisfactory story to share.” I continued, “Now, I want one
of you to explain the underlying reason for our sad project stories.”
Jose pointed out, “There’s a plethora of reasons. Sometimes, we
experience manpower shortages, and at other times, we creep up our
project scope. It is a long, long list!”
I interrupted, “And then we play the blame game. Please listen. I
don’t want to turn this meeting into a blamestorming session.”
“We are probably missing the real reasons here. We don’t know
why our projects fail, despite the project team preparing an endless
stream of reports on and analyses of the project.” Hassan, the chief
flexitricity officer responded.
I interrupted again. “And when finished, the stack of reports are
almost one-foot in height. Right?” I questioned. “These are excuses
and I do not want to hear them anymore.”
Pin drop silence prevailed.
I said, “It may sound funny, but I want all of you to think seriously
about SEWA projects from now on. Today, of course, the rules are different. We need to inculcate the work ethics needed to complete our
projects successfully. The winners will be those who figure them out.”

27

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Was it hard to change our old ways and habits?
Absolutely!
This is where the adventure and jurney begin in a highly conversational style
So, take a breath, slow down, and let’s begin the powerful journey
that the SEWA project management model has for us.

28

CONTENTS

CHAPTER THREE

PROJECTS, PROJECTS,
AND PROJECTS

The Challenges and Trade-Offs
I began, “Dear associates, you might be wondering why I have
repeated the word projects in the slide up there. Here’s the reason; when I took over the chairman’s position at SEWA, I was
confronted with mammoth-sized challenges, particularly with the
organization’s mega projects. The projects were draining/sapping a
lot of resources, mainly money and time. What’s more, they caused
sleepless nights, sleep-walking nights, and nightmarish nights! I
was confronted with projects that had experienced massive scope
creeps.”
“Ladies and gentlemen, before we start a project, we need to
persuade our shareholders and stakeholders and the organization
in general that the project will solve a problem or address a need.
Only when this is accomplished is it worth investing the necessary
time, money, and manpower.”
Everyone was listening carefully.
I continued, “In fact, the projects have been on ‘no-scope’ mode
for many years! On the other hand, SEWA has also had a long list
of ‘never-ending’ projects, some of which are creeping; these are always-on projects. Finally, some are ‘malnutritioned’ projects; that
is, those on the verge of death due to a lack of ‘healthy-balanced’
resources.”
29

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

This haunted me! Here’s a list of the major complications I had to
cope with during my initial days at SEWA:
• Lack of visibility and clarity in all projects.
• Insufficient resources (funding and personnel).
• Unclear project objectives.
• Schedule and cost overruns.
• Starting projects but not finishing them on time.
• Managing scope creep.
• Poor communication management.
• A non-collaborative working atmosphere.
And the list goes on and on!
While looking at each team member, I asked, “Don’t you agree?”
Fatima, the chief SHEngineering officer, said, “Sir, I totally agree
with you here. Over the years, SEWA managers have developed a
few useful tactics for achieving profitable project outcomes. However, when trying to apply them, SEWA frequently encounters new
obstacles and trade-offs. The reason, in my opinion, is that internal
bureaucracy, red tape, and complexity have prevented the existing talent from thinking in new and innovative ways.”

Face the Issues
In a nutshell, the organization was losing its focus. Although I had
listed the dissonances, they were only half of the story—the remainder concerned how to tackle such mighty challenges. I knew that I
was the lone warrior and savior. In short, I had to act like Japanese
Samurai warriors to rescue the situation. In this situation, I reminded
myself of a quote by Aldous Huxley:
“Experience is not what happens to you.
It’s what you do with what happens to you.”

30

CONTENTS

Projects, Projects, And Projects

Take Action
It’s a worthy aim, but where should I start? The above challenges were
like a shot in the arm. My priority, then, was to redress the mega
projects. Being an academician and a corporate leader, I borrowed
my thoughts and wisdom from both the theoretical and practical
backgrounds and viewed SEWA projects in my own way. Now was
the time to cut the challenges into bite-sized chunks, but how? To
straighten things out, I capitalized on my intellect, information, and
knowledge garnered in managing differently-sized projects during my
entire working life.
Lastly, to ‘size-up’ the projects and find that breakthrough moment, I sketched out a fool-proof plan that would put the projects
back on track and mitigate the associated challenges. This wouldn’t
happen by duplicating existing models already. The mathematician
George E. P. Box once remarked,
“Essentially all models are wrong, but some are useful.”
I hope you will find our project management model a little less wrong
and a little more useful than the alternatives. Being a huge organization with over 5500 employees, as well as rendering electricity, water,
and natural piped gas to a population of over 1.5 million people was
bound to involve a host of long-term projects. Hence, I began with
the long-term complex projects with the intention of either increasing future revenue or reducing future expenditures.
Was my journey difficult? It sure was.
Did I overcome the obstacles? Indeed, yes.
Was I alone? Not really. I had my nine project champions.
I was filled with passion and vision; I called for a kick-off meeting
with my team the very next day.

31

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER FOUR

THE IRON TRIANGLE
It was well past midday. The nine project champions had gathered in
our newest meeting room, ‘the Room of Possibilities.’ The room was
overflowing with excitement and positivity. All of them showed up.
No one was missing.
You have chosen gems! I said to myself.
I said, “Thank you all for participating in today’s meeting. Indeed, it’s a remarkable day today. We are going to make some tangible
changes in the way we handle projects here. Today is the beginning of
a transformational journey.”
“Whoa, quite interesting!” exclaimed Ghada, the chief greenification officer.
“Now, let me make this more interesting for all of us. Let’s dig in;
who would like to explain the project management success triangle?”
I inquired.
“Is it the project management iron triangle we’re talking about
here?” asked Ghada, the chief greenification officer.
“Yes, indeed,” I replied.
She said, “Ahh, you must be challenging us. We’ve been doing
project’s for years now. That’s a piece of cake.” She continued, “The
project management success triangle is all about delivering the projects outcome within the established scope, time, cost, and level of
quality.”
“Well said,” I said ruefully. “That’s the answer I was expecting.
Such a typical answer! However, that’s the traditional way of managing projects. But, for us, it’s high time we move beyond the traditional iron triangle!” I exclaimed.
32

CONTENTS

The Iron Triangle

Ghada’s mouth dropped open.
I said, “I would like to introduce my new golden triangle of project
management to you all.”
“Really! Is there a golden triangle too? We didn’t know this,”
Masud, the chief sustainalytics officer said while scratching his head.
“Surprisingly, there is one,” I replied with a smirk.
“Please tell us more,” replied Ahmed Babiker, the chief culture officer.
Jose, the chief FinTech officer, inquired, “What point do you want
us to bring home?”
I replied, “I want to put in plain English that the central task of
projects is to combine the works of different people into a singular,
coherent whole that will be useful to people or customers.”
The team gaped at each other. Perhaps my statement changed their
perception of projects in general.
“And what about the golden triangle of project management that
you spoke about a while ago?” Fatima, the chief SHEngineering
officer, asked.
I replied, “Yes, I am coming to that. My golden triangle is unconventional, not typical—it’s atypical.”
“We are eagerly waiting to learn what it is all about,” the team said
in a chorus.
“All right. I’ll spill the beans. My project management golden
triangle states that, henceforth, all the projects SEWA undertakes shall
be completed on time, below budget, and within scope, as well as
delight the customer. That’s my prime objective,” I declared.
Moments of silence passed.
“Before I proceed with the presentation, let me share with you
about a project that was recently completed on time, below budget,
and exceeds my expectations—It’s the SEWA O2 Room.”
I continued, “It’s a room with pure oxygen bars for SEWA employees to feel refreshed and render heightened concentration, alertness,
and memory. All of the oxygen concentrators are compliant with the
FDA and are CSA and CE approved.”
“I love the way this project was executed with precision and planning. It complies with my golden triangle.”
33

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

The team listened in awe.
“Now, team, please look at the screen, the infographic shown summarizes the triangle,” I said.

I could see raised eyebrows, crossed arms, and clenched jaws.
“Sounds good? Any questions?” I asked.
“Does this mean we’ve been doing projects haphazardly?” asked
May, the chief imagineering officer. “You’ve made us seem incompetent in the eyes of our peers.”
“Nothing could be further from the truth,” I replied. “I’m just
trying to lend a helping hand.”
“Do you want us to start gold-plating our deliverables?” asked
Masud, the chief sustainalytics officer.
I replied, “Not at all. Gold-plating the deliverables after the scope
has been agreed to can be very costly. In addition, the customer might
be led to believe that they can get these gold-plated “add-ons” for free
on future projects because a new standard has been set.”
34

CONTENTS

The Iron Triangle

The chief culture officer added, “Yes, we shouldn’t fall into this
habit as it will inevitably come back to haunt us.”
“What do you mean?” Masud asked while raising his eyebrows.
I smiled and said, “Let me answer this. A little over a decade ago,
something unexpected happened in the banking sector in the United
States, sending out huge ripples that shook the financial industry,
both in the United States and across the globe.”
“Can anyone tell me which incident am I talking about?” I
inquired.
“The global meltdown?” the chief culture officer asked hesitatingly.
I said, “Yes, you got it right. I am referring to the global meltdown
of 2008; however, I would like to point out the Lehman Brothers
scandal.”
I continued, “On September 15, 2008, Lehman Brothers filed for
bankruptcy protection, thereby shaking consumer confidence in the
economy and sending out the message that no institution was too big
to fail.”
“What was so special about the Lehman Brother collapse? Enron
collapsed before Lehman Brothers,” Fatima said.
I replied, “The collapse of Lehman Brothers was significant for a
number of reasons. At the time of filing for bankruptcy, the bank had
$639 billion in assets and $619 in debt, making this the largest bankruptcy filing ever, even surpassing the collapse of other giants, such as
Enron and WorldCom.”
I continued, in the same breadth, “In fact, Lehman’s bankruptcy
filing was more than one and a half times the size of Sweden’s GDP
in the same year. What made Lehman Brother’s bankruptcy filing
even more shocking was that it came less than a year after the bank
had posted its biggest profits ever and after repeated assurances by
the bank’s chief executives that its leverage was manageable, liquidity
levels were high, and the bank’s overall finances were looking good.
They gold-plated the truth!”
“Quite often, I have noticed that the project manager becomes
the dumping ground for all problems that the project team cannot
resolve. Remember the story of the Titanic, the “unsinkable” ship.
35

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

How many more would have survived if the Captain had called for
help the minute they struck the iceberg?” I continued, “I’m sorry to
say, the way we are functioning seems like a vicious circle to me.”
“But, the field of project management is an ever-moving target,
isn’t it?” asked Afra, the chief efficienology officer.
“Yes, I couldn’t agree more. But, as Henry Miller, the author of A
Devil in Paradise, stated,
“One’s destination is never a place,
but rather a new way of looking at things.”
“In short, I want you all to take into account the views/opinions of
our shareholders and stakeholders,” I stated.
The room lapsed into silence.

36

CONTENTS

CHAPTER FIVE

DO US A FLAVOR

Afra, the chief efficienology officer, broke the silence by saying, “We
are of two minds now. Mixed feelings. Mixed emotions.”
At first, I thought of ducking the question. Then, I told myself,
Don’t give up, you can clear any possible shadow of doubt. You aren’t
going to capture their hearts with theory alone. Tell them something pragmatic—a real success story. People love stories.
“Look, let me make it easier for you guys,” I said. “Those who own
the data own the future. Data is the new oil. Let’s take the example of
something familiar—like Frito-Lay.”
“The potato chips company?” the chief imagineering officer asked.
“Yum, chips are mouth-watering,” the chief sustainalytics offcer
said. “I just love all the flavors,” he continued.
I smiled and said, “Indeed, most of us do. But, does anyone know
who’s behind those deliciously seasoned potato chips?”
“No way. It’s a tough world out there. Even potatoes have a story
to tell!” said Masud.
Yes, the Frito-Lay thing seemed to hit the mark, I told myself.
I said in an excited tone, “Would you like to hear the story?”
I could see a big yes in their eyes.
I continued, “Here’s an appetizing story behind Frito-Lay’s
scrumptious chips. In 2012, Frito-Lay launched in the U.S. what
would become a winning annual contest, the ‘Do Us a Flavor’ campaign, which crowd-sourced ideas for new potato chip flavors. The
company had already tested the campaign in other countries, generating a whopping eight million submissions.”
37

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Sorry, did you say eight million? How did it work?” the chief
FinTech officer inquired.
I answered, “Contestants submit flavor ideas on the ‘Do Us a
Flavor’ website; they choose a catchy title, up to three ingredients,
create a quick pitch, and design the bag. A judging panel of experts
narrows it down to three winning flavors. Then, the flavors enter the
product development pipeline, during which recipes are developed
and tested by the Frito-Lay team. The winner gets one million dollars
or 1% of the flavor’s net sales in that year, whichever is greater.”
“Ohh, one million dollars or more. Wow, that’s amazing. It simply
blows my mind away,” replied Jose, the chief FinTech officer.
“That’s because, it touches a human chord. We all want our voices
to be heard and talked about,” I replied.
“That’s a great story! Simple, yet incredible. I am going to tell my
kids about it,” Masud, the chief sustainalytics officer, said.
I leaned back in my chair and said, “As the American researcher
Casandra Brené Brown says,
“Stories are data with soul”

Communicate Your Story
“Let me tell you another story that’s more relatable and will give you
a glimpse of the magic of brand engagement,” I continued.
“Really? Please tell us,” replied Ahmed Babiker, the chief culture officer.
“This story is about two of our colleagues. Boutheina, our chief
branding officer, and Mariam, the newly recruited technical marketing engineer. On April 22, 2019, they were invited to attend the
‘Accenture: Design and Tech Talks’ forum, which was held in partnership with BusinessLive ME.”
“Wow, what an opportunity! I always enjoy technical networking.
It keeps you up-to-date on what’s going on in the business world,”
exclaimed the chief SHEngineering officer.

38

CONTENTS

Do Us A Flavor

“It was a half-day conference at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in
Dubai. This invitation-only event focused on what’s ahead in ‘Design
and Technology’,” I continued.
Afra, the chief efficienology officer, pointed out, “I’m sure the
event must have featured high-level presentations and panel discussions covering all the key aspects of building amazing experiences
with technology and realities of the post-digital era.”
“Indeed, it was an incredible event. But the story that I want to
share is slightly different,” I replied.
The chief SHEngineering officer asked, “What is it, sir?”
I replied, “During the event, they happened to meet a top official
from SAP who attended the conference that day; the official explained
that they are very keen on working with SEWA. He said that he has
been hearing about the transformational leadership and the new
management philosophies of SEWA and was keen on exploring ways
to collaborate and co-create.”
“That’s great news,” the chief imagineering officer said.
“There’s more to the story,” I replied. “The SAP official also
extended an offer to them to visit a global SAP event to be held in
May 2019, wherein they would showcase their range of product and
service portfolio to SEWA.” I continued, “And the icing on the cake
is that they offered to do a pilot project for SEWA at no cost.”
“You mean they would work with us for free?” Masud, the chief
sustainalytics officer, asked.
“Yes, absolutely free—zero cost,” I replied, smiling.
“As expected, just like you all, even Boutheina and Mariam were
excited about the offer to the point that they actually came back to
remind me that if we are to attend the event, then we’d better make a
quick decision and accept the offer.”
“This is a true example of brand engagement. The SAP gentleman
was able to hook onto the minds of our employees and hit the target
home that Boutheina and Mariam actually became their brand ambassadors!” I exclaimed.

39

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

I continued, “This is the brand essence I want to inculcate in
SEWA. To become a recommendable brand. Influence people’s
mind—be an influencer brand.”
“Whoa, this sounds like a slippery slope,” the chief culture officer
pointed out bluntly.
“Not really, it’s a bumpy and rugged road, but if maneuvered brilliantly, it can reap enormous benefits,” I replied sternly.
“Ohh,” the chief culture officer sighed.
I added, “To get there, we must jump into real life and work on
real issues that might be difficult but will certainly be fun.”
As I was saying this, Boutheina, the chief branding officer requested to see me for a few moments. I signaled her to come in and join us.

40

CONTENTS

CHAPTER SIX

BRAND WITH
POTENTIAL

“By the way, I’ve a great news for you all!” I announced cheerfully.
“Whoa! Can’t wait to hear the good news. What is it, sir?” the chief
greenification officer asked.
“Boutheina has been trying to reach out to Google Inc. to learn
about tips to enhance SEWA’s digital presence.” I said, “We had a
quick discussion last week, and I suggested that she send an email to
their office explaining our pain points.”
“Aha . . . I know. I have gone through similar experiences before,”
the chief flexitricity officer said and paused for a few moments to look
at other’s reactions. “Last week, I was trying to reach out to a tech firm
but failed to receive a reply to my emails.”
The team sighed.
He continued, “I just ended up receiving an automated notification
email with some subscription links!”
Everyone rolled their eyes at him.
“Well, quite contrary to popular belief, Boutheina received both
a call and an email from Google’s European head office in Dublin,
Ireland,” I replied.
“Really, that’s an amazing piece of information,” the chief efficienology officer said while walking briskly towards the coffee counter.
“What did they write back?” the chief FinTech officer inquired.

41

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Mr. Ali Ahsan, business development consultant from the Google
customer solutions department, wrote back that they identify SEWA
as a brand with potential.”
“That’s awesome. ‘A brand with potential’, a real feather in our
caps. This comment means a lot to us,” the chief efficienology officer
exclaimed.
“There’s more,” I said.
“He further offered to help us build a custom-tailored, digital
marketing strategy using Google’s AdWords platform, which includes
Search, Display, Gmail, YouTube, and the Google Play store,” I
continued.
“Someone, please pinch me so that I’ll know I am not daydreaming!” yelled May, the chief imagineering officer.
“Wait, let me finish,” I said as I sipped my coffee. “Furthermore,
he also offered account management for any campaigns that SEWA
would launch, with a dedicated account handler who will optimize
and manage the campaigns for us.”
I paused for a few seconds, allowing the suspense to build up.
I smiled and said, “Now, hold onto your breath, because here
comes the best part. All these services are complimentary if we work
out a deal strategy together, based on an equal partnership.”
Everyone drew long breaths and just sat in silence.
I continued, “Can you believe your ears? Google is addressing
us as a ‘brand with potential.’ I know of companies who would pay
thousands of dollars to get this comment about their companies.”
Boutheina, the chief branding officer, commented, “We never
poured money into traditional marketing. Never spent our marketing
dollars on banners and hoardings.”
The team stared at her, hypnotized. No one uttered a word.
I said, “I can tell you that recommendations and word-of-mouth
success don’t happen by accident. They’re the result of a deliberate
strategy and consistent day-to-day—and year-to-year—execution.”
“That calls for a staggering amount of hard work and commitment
to excellence,” the chief culture officer pointed out.

42

CONTENTS

Brand With Potential

“By all means, yes, but don’t panic. I have an astonishing no-goofup technique for you to cope up with the pressure,” I continued.
“Sir, may I come in?” Syeda, the chief knowledge officer asked
timidly. She was carrying a few files for approval.
I nodded.

The Magic of Service
“What’s that technique sir?” Hassan, the chief flexitricity officer, inquired.
“Wait a moment! Before I share that bit of magical information
with you all,” I continued while looking at Syeda, the chief knowledge
officer. I said, “Here you are! Syeda, can we invite the gentleman from
Google, Mr. Ali Hasan, to attend our upcoming customer service
week in October?”
“Service week? What’s that?” the chief imagineering officer asked
under her breath.
“Syeda, why don’t you spill the beans about the customer service
week celebration?” I said while looking at her.
“Sure, with all pleasure,” she answered and then continued, “The
SEWA Customer Service Week is celebrated annually during the first
full week in October, in alignment with the national customer service
week celebrated globally. As a matter of fact, last year, 2018, the
chairman gave me a tough task to be registered on the U.S. website
within less than two weeks and take this up as a project.”
“And guess what, we were able to position ourselves successfully
as the only government organization from the UAE to celebrate the
national customer service week for two consecutive years. In fact, the
website placed our logo next to mega-conglomerates, such as IBM,
Microsoft, Amazon, etc.”
“Wow,” the chief FinTech officer added, “This is a very thoughtful
idea.”
Syeda smiled and continued, “It promotes the important role that
customer service plays in every organization’s success and provides

43

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

a formal opportunity to thank those working on the front-lines to
serve and support customers.”
She continued, “The 2019 customer service week theme is ‘The
Magic of Service.’ The theme recognizes that good service is magical.
It can turn an unhappy customer into a satisfied long-term customer.
It can turn an occasional customer into a repeat customer. And it can
turn any customer into your biggest fan and advocate.”
“It’s no wonder, sir, that you have always reminded us of the fact
that happy employees keep the customers happy,” the chief design
thinking officer said in excitement. “And you’ve given us the SEWA
customer-centric model as well.”
This statement rang a bell to me.
I said, “I have an interesting story. Last year, in September 2018,
it was 5 in the morning—after a five-hour, red-eye flight—when I
arrived at the hotel where, in three hours, I would face 150 participants
and deliver a keynote speech on Alleem Sustainable Development
Goals. Something really bizarre happened.”
“What happened, sir?” asked Syeda, the chief knowledge officer.
“I was thrown into unexpected circumstances that reminded me
to expect the unexpected,” I replied.
Everyone said in unison, “What happened?”
I smiled and replied, “The receptionist couldn’t find my reservation
and didn’t seem to care. And, when I got to my room 90 minutes
later, a note of greeting read, “Hospitality and service as a way of life”!”
“Oh, what an irony!” Syeda quipped.
I replied, in a husky tone, “I shared this incident to spotlight that
being customer-centric requires a culture where employees must live
the inspirational quotes espoused on the walls. They must walk the
talk.”
“Well said, sir. I couldn’t agree more,” replied Ghada, the chief
greenification officer.
I put my hands on my head and looked at the ceiling.
I said, “Let me share a similar incident. This morning, Mr. Raj
Agarwal, MD & CEO of GENUS Power Infrastructures & Innovation
Limited, visited SEWA for the first time, and here is the news. You all
will be amazed to hear to what he experienced here.”
44

CONTENTS

Brand With Potential

Everyone looked at me.
I continued, “He said that on the way to SEWA, he was a little
nervous and apprehensive about what our head office would look like.
He had imagined it as a boring and worn out government building
with sleepwalking employees who wouldn’t care enough to smile.”
“However, he was surprised to see a ‘smiley-face board’ at the
entrance of our headquarters. In fact, he said that he was taken aback
by such a pleasant gesture. He immediately felt relaxed and composed.
In short, he felt at home.”
I paused for a moment and then said, “This is customer delight in
a real sense. Do you all agree?”
The room echoed agreement.
“Now, coming back to the magical no-goof-up technique to cope
up with pressure,” I said.
“Yeah, we are all ears,” the chief flexitricity officer replied.

45

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER SEVEN

SHOSHIN
“Are you familiar with the Japanese word shoshin?” I asked.
Based on the facial expressions of everyone in the room, I could see
that it was a new term for them.
“I honestly don’t have a clue,” the chief design-thinking officer said.
I continued, “Shoshin is a word from Zen Buddhism meaning
‘beginner’s mind’; it refers to having an attitude of openness,
eagerness, and lack of preconceptions when studying a subject, even
when studying at an advanced level, just as a beginner would. Staying
curious and open is what makes growth possible, and it requires
practice to maintain that mindset. To keep learning, we have to avoid
the temptation to slide into narrow and safe views of what we do. Let
me quote what Tracee Ellis Ross famously said,
“I am learning every day to allow the space between where I
am and where I want to be to inspire me and not terrify me.”
The team listened in silence.
I continued, “This is the reason why I had introduced my new
project, golden triangle, to you all. Let’s look at the traditional project
management from unconventional perspectives. It’s good—actually
essential—to evolve and change our perceptions.”
“Come on now, I think, I’ve spoken enough to convince you all to
think in the shoshin way. Disperse the clouds of doubts,” I said.
I paused for a moment.
“Our meeting ends here. We will catch up again next week, same
day, same place, and I want you to think about my golden triangle of
project management,” I announced.
46

CONTENTS

SHOSHIN

Then, I looked at Ahmed Babiker, my chief culture officer and
said, “As Tony Hsieh, Zappos CEO, enthusiastically points out;
“Whatever you’re thinking, think bigger.”
“I, too, want to think bigger now. I want you to send an email to the
rest of the managers and employees as well, attaching the file of my
project management golden triangle and seeking their views/opinions
about it. And, by the way, don’t forget to send them some information about shoshin!”
Ahmed Babiker nodded in consent.
“And, yes, keep the wellspring of enthusiasm and energy going as
we continue our journey onward,” I said in an exhilarated tone.
The team dispersed. They looked confident and encouraged. I saw
rays of hope shining in their eyes.
I was at the crossroads of a decisive and defining moment. There
was no turning back. But, I reminded myself that when the mind,
body, soul, and spirit work together, anything is possible.
The week flew by in a flurry. The day of our next meeting arrived.
The team had assembled in the ‘Room of Possibilities.’
Let’s find out what had happened in that room!

47

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER EIGHT

ROOM OF POSSIBILITIES

Date: may 1, 2019
Time:10:10 am
Location: room of possibilities

I gathered the team in one of our important meeting rooms: the ‘Room
of Possibilities.’ It’s usually where our best ideas come to us, a room
where we can allow our minds to wonder freely. Through quick talks
and discussions, in this room, we go beyond the low hanging fruit
that SEWA has already identified by digging down to the grassroots
level of critical subjects.
Before I take you to the ‘Room of Possibilities’ and make you a
part of the discussion that we had that day, I’m indebted to share
with my readers a proud moment for me! As of writing this page,
on May 21, 2019, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al
Maktoum, Vice President and Prime Minister of the UAE and Ruler
of Dubai, launched the world’s first virtual ‘Ministry of Possibilities’
to incubate and develop radical solutions to the government’s most
pressing problems. The ‘Ministry of Possibilities’ represents the next
generation of government practices and oversees top-priority national
portfolios that require quick, bold, and effective decisions by applying
design-thinking and experimentation to develop proactive and
disruptive solutions to tackle critical issues.
48

CONTENTS

Room Of Possibilities

Undoubtedly, it was great news, and I was joyous about it. However, I had more than one reasons to be happy. In 2018, almost a year
before the formation of the ‘Ministry of Possibilities,’ I had renamed
one of the SEWA offices to the ‘Room of Possibilities.’ I was overwhelmed to see my country in tandem with my thoughts and philosophies. It gave me a great sense of fulfillment.
Now, let’s get back to the meeting day.
So, the team members had settled into their chairs. The chief imagineering officer was her usual self—excited and gregarious! The rest
of the team appeared in somber spirits, except for the chief FinTech
officer and chief greenification officer, who were engrossed in a têteà-tête.
I entered the room and said in a cheerful tone, “Our theme is to
simplify SEWA’s project management and mitigate risks. So, how do
we get started?”
The chief culture officer said, “Sir, if you would, please allow me
to say something.”
I nodded my head and signalled him to proceed.
“As instructed by you, I forwarded the email to everyone, starting
with front-line managers, supervisors, team leaders, and the rest of
the SEWA family introducing your project golden triangle,” he said.
“Well done,” I said.
“Well, do you want to know the opinions and feedback I received?”
he asked.
“Why not? I would like to hear what they have to say,” I replied.
“It didn’t go down well with some of the managers and the majority, I’m sorry to say; some made jokes out of it!” he replied. “It seems
few of our managers and most of our people didn’t welcome the idea,”
he responded anxiously.
“Look, rejection is hard, but to get acceptance you have to put
up with a lot of rejection,” I said in a reassuring tone. “Get ready for
skinned knees and elbows. You can’t be the kid standing at the top of
the waterslide, overthinking it. You have to go down the chute.”
Everyone nodded their heads.

49

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

I smiled and added, “Don’t worry, the idea will soon be accepted
and implemented. Don’t lose hope. We need to work as a unified
team, willing to push back on each other to get results.”
I sipped my morning coffee reflectively and asked the team
a question that had been nagging me since I had talked about the
golden triangle.
“Has any one of you watched the King Kong movie? Do you
remember the iconic climax of the movie?” I asked the team.
The chief efficienology officer said, “I do. Wow, that was long
time back. I was a kid. No one can forget the nerve racking action
moments of King Kong clinging to the highest tower in the town and
swatting at airplanes like flies they flew around him!”
“Does anyone know the name of that highest tower?” I asked.
“I know it. It is located in New York City, isn’t it?” the chief culture
officer asked.
“Yes,” I replied, “but can you name the building?”
“I know it; it is the Empire State Building,” the chief SHEngineering answered.
I said, “Well, then, let me tell you an interesting story about that
gigantic tower that King Kong immortalized—yes, it’s the Empire
State Building in New York City. The tower is a successful example of
project management history. Perhaps most important of all, once you
understand how they did what they did, you can follow in their footsteps and achieve the extraordinary in your project management.”

The Empire State Building
I continued, “For individuals of this generation, mention of the
Empire State Building may evoke the image of Ray Harryhausen’s
(movie director) animated giant, King Kong, clinging to the needle at
its summit and swatting hapless biplanes out of the air, with Fay Wray
(movie actress) alternately screaming and fainting at his feet. The fact
that the movie was released less than two years after the completion of
the building is suggestive of how rapidly the edifice became regarded

50

CONTENTS

Room Of Possibilities

as an icon of world architecture. More remarkable, still, is the speed
at which it was completed!”
The team was listening with full attention.
Looking at the excitement on their faces, I continued, “According
to projectmanagmenthistory.com, construction of the Empire State
Building began on St. Patrick’s Day, March 17, 1930. One year and
45 days later, on May 1, 1931, it was officially opened. At 1,454
feet, with 102 stories and 1.2 million square feet of rentable space,
the building has been honored by the American Society of Civil
Engineers as one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World. The
fact that it was completed in approximately seven million man-hours
represents a major evolutionary shift. The building was constructed in
ways that differed from conventional projects of the time.”
“Very interesting, very interesting. A real good case study,” the
chief efficienology officer said.

An Adaptive, Iterative Approach
I smiled, and said, “The Empire State Inc. investors realized that it
would be necessary to discard the custom of transferring control of
the project’s design to architects. The project leaders admitted that
the project demanded ability, experience, and organization beyond
the scope of a single professional unit and would, if undertaken by
the architect’s office, involve a duplication of effort and loss of time
too expensive to be tolerated in an operation requiring large capital
investment.”
“What did they do then?” the chief greenification officer asked.
I continued, “They committed to an adaptive, iterative approach,
in which efficiency of practice was facilitated through ongoing intercommunication between working groups, enabling the elimination
of waste in relation to materials, work structure, and man hours.”
“That’s mind-blowing!” the chief imagineering officer said in an
excited tone. “Unbelievable.”
I said, “Wait, there’s more to it. It is interesting to reflect that the
approach adopted or the Empire State Building project contributed

51

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

to the rejuvenation of Japanese industry in the aftermath of World
War II. The Japanese industry introduced project management concepts learned indirectly from the Empire State Building project. The
positive consequences of these ideas is most conspicuously evinced in
the rise to prominence of the Toyota auto company.”
May, the chief imagineering officer said, “Toyota’s commitment to
ongoing improvement—Kaizen—was based on a determination to
reduce ‘waste’ from the manufacturing process, wasn’t it?
I smiled and said, “That’s right. There’s not an iota of doubt that
the Empire State Building project succeeded through the innovation
of envisioning and designing the project as a short-term self-regulating manufacturing process, evolving organically and dynamically—
kaizen like—to meet the requirements of value and scheduling.”
The chief SHEngineering officer said, “Sir, we are convinced that
in this new and challenging era, there’s very little room for error. But,
I can only imagine how difficult it’s going to be.”
“Sir, just because a technique was employed last month or last
year doesn’t mean it applies today. Every team and project is different,
and there are often good reasons to question old judgments,” she
continued.
I replied, “Yes, I see your point of view, but the reason that I want
you all to think unconventionally is to figure out the unnecessary
practices of managing projects because the unnecessary ones tend to
snowball, dragging teams down into the tar pit of difficult situations.
Since 80% of cost and schedule overruns are usually due to the last
10–20% of requested functionality.”
I continued, “When processes are required to manage processes,
it’s hard to know where the actual work is being done.”
Deep down, I told myself, If I’m focused on, committed to, excited
about, and capable of succeeding, the odds increase that everyone else will
behave the same way.
What is it that I seek now? I asked myself.
A voice came from within, and I said, “You want your employees
to change. You seek a paradigm shift in their old-school thoughts.”

52

CONTENTS

Room Of Possibilities

I know change is a process, not an event. It will take some time. I’m
never in favor of shortcuts, I said to myself while still caught in my
lukewarm thoughts.
Suddenly, I looked out of the window, and as far as the eye can
see, I could see crystal-clear blue sky. Suddenly, I spotted the tip
of the Burj Khalifa, the tallest skyscraper in the world, an epitome
of commitment, passion, and larger-than-life vision. With a total
height of 2,722 ft, Burj Khalifa is synonymous to a living wonder.
Undoubtedly, it’s a stunning work of art and an incomparable feat
of engineering. More than just the world’s tallest building, Burj
Khalifa is an unprecedented example of international cooperation,
a symbolic beacon of progress, and an emblem of the new, dynamic,
and prosperous Middle East.
I felt very proud.
I began, “Dear team, I completely understand your dilemma.”
I continued in a reassuring tone, “Don’t worry. I won’t let you
enter the battle ground full-throttle all by yourselves.” I said, looking
at their perplexed faces, “To boost our chances of a successful transformation, we have to take the right actions.”
“But, how? Do you have a magic wand?” quipped Masud, the
chief sustainalytics officer.
“A secret victory weapon?” asked Ahmed Babiker, the chief culture
officer.
I laughed and said, “I have an interesting formula that will help us
navigate the travesty.”
The team looked at me, admiring my Eureka moment.

53

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER NINE

STAY EAGER

“I’ll be back in the bat of an eye,” I said while looking at the team.
“Sir, where are you heading to?” the chief culture officer asked hesitatingly.
“To my ‘state of mind’ corner in my office. But, this time it’s not
for a quick mindfulness exercise; rather, it’s to grab one of my favorite
books from the crowded shelf of my library next to my ‘state of mind’
corner,” I said with a smile.
“Let’s bring it on!” The chief efficienology officer said in an enthusiastic tone.
I said to myself, I haven’t laid eyes on that book in weeks, so good luck
finding it in my office!
I entered the office with enthusiasm and went straight to my
library. This library is special for multiple reasons. It consists of
books that have served as my references in writing The SEWA
Series compendium, namely, The SEWA Way, The SEWA Brand
Turnaround & Rejuvenation, The SEWA Customer-centric Model, The
SEWA Marketing Plan, and The SEWA Brand Leadership. The books in
this library have a lot in common, apart from the wisdom they hold;
all have dog-eared pages, highlighted text, and sticky notes decorating
the edges of the books.
With a quick look at the shelves, I was able to spot the book for
which I was searching.
“Aha, there you are! Perched comfortably at the top shelf,” I
murmured. “Come, it’s time to unravel the secrets you store.”

54

CONTENTS

Stay Eager

“Got it!” I said aloud as I entered the room. I could see their eyes
following the book, as I held the book down at the desk.
The team looked at me. I could sense exhilaration in the air. They
looked ecstatic and thrilled. They saw me and began to clap fervently.
“What happened? What’s the reason behind your change in
mood?” I asked.
May, the chief imagineering officer, stood up to speak. Her eyes
were almost filled with tears. She said, “Major Hazza Al Mansoori,
the UAE’s first astronaut, landed safely back in the UAE.”
“That’s incredible news!” I said out enthusiastically.
Keeping the book on the meeting desk, I moved towards the TV
shelf and picked up the remote control.
“Let’s witness this memorable event live!” I said. I tuned into our
national channel, and we saw the historical event live on television.
Major Hazza Al Mansoori was received by HH Sheikh Mohamed
bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi, at the Presidential Airport in Abu Dhabi. Hazza was joined by backup astronaut
Dr. Sultan Al Neyadi, and the pair were given a hero’s welcome when
they landed at the Presidential Terminal at Abu Dhabi International
Airport on a Presidential Flight at 4.40 p.m.
Emerging from the presidential aircraft, Hazza waved to the awaiting crowd from the top of the stairs, wearing the Mohammed Bin
Rashid Space Centre (MBRSC) blue space suit and draped in a UAE
flag. Upon his descent, he was met by the Crown Prince, and the two
exchanged greetings.
“Wow, it’s such a heart-warming, historic day,” the chief efficienology officer said.
Everyone was glued to the TV screen.
Astronaut Al Mansouri then presented the Crown Prince with the
flag of the UAE, which he took along with him on his journey to the
International Space Station.
The Deputy Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces was
accompanied by his grandchildren, other ministers, and more than
100 school children to welcome the astronaut back home.

55

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Then, we saw Astronaut Hazza Al proceeding towards media personnel to deliver his press release.
The team looked up and quickly tensed their body language.
“Indeed, it’s a proud moment for our country,” I said with a great
sense of pride. “The future is in the hands of the youth.”
The room was vibrating in the spirit of nationhood.
“Sir, I see that you found the book that you were looking for,” said
May, the chief imagineering officer.
“What is the name of the book?” asked Ghada, the chief greenification officer.
“It’s called, The Key MBA Models by Julian Birkinshaw and Ken
Mark,” I said. “This is a collection of 60+ models used in the lexicon
of management.”
The chief knowledge officer wanted to be the first to lay her hands
on the book. Picking up the book, she glanced through it quickly,
sifting through the dog-eared pages.
She asked, “There’s no doubt that this book is a compilation of
groundbreaking management models, but how does it affect our ballgame?”
“You will find that out soon,” I replied with a bright smile.
“Dear team, it’s not a self-help or a get-rich-quick book that delivers blinkered storytelling,” I answered.
“Have a look at this; ‘Change Management: Kotter’s Eight-Step
Model’ is the first chapter of the book,” I said while showing the first
chapter of the book to the team.
A team member asked, “Sir, do you mean that we need to resort to
change management practices?” After a moment, the chief greenification officer asked, “Re-engineering times?”
I said, “You got it! Change management is a permanent part of
the leadership landscape. It never goes away. We need to shatter oldschool thoughts and break free from the shackles of thinking ‘but this
is the way we’ve always done it.’ We are living in challenging times.
Today’s landscape is treacherous and constantly shifting, causing us to
be available 24/7 and 365.”

56

CONTENTS

Stay Eager

I could sense that the team was listening to me.
I added, “Which inevitably leads us to take bigger risks and urges
us to take a stroll on thin ice.”
“I couldn’t agree more, sir; many organizations fumble while
implementing change,” the chief knowledge officer opined.
“That’s why it pays to listen to John Kotter, founder of Kotter
International and a well-known thought leader in the fields of
business, leadership, and change,” I said. “Kotter’s eight-step model is
probably the most well-regarded in the change management arena.”
“Sounds interesting!” Moza, the chief restructuring officer
quipped.
“Why don’t you read the eight-steps aloud?” I asked the chief
restructuring officer, handing the book to her.
As things began to improve, my aspirations increased.

57

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

CHAPTER TEN

IMPLEMENT A CHANGE
PROGRAM

Moza adjusted her eyeglasses, which were perched on her nose, cleared
her throat, and read the following steps:
Step 1: Establish a sense of urgency.
Step 2: Form a powerful coalition.
Step 3: Create a vision for change.
She stopped and looked around. I nodded and smiled at her. The
rest of the team were also listening to her quietly.
She continued to read.
Step 4: Communicate the vision.
The chief greenification officer blurted out, “Wait a moment. This
step reminds me of a beautiful excerpt from John C. Maxwell’s book,
Good Leaders Ask Great Questions. Here it goes;
The word communication comes from the Latin word communis, meaning “common.” Before we can communicate we
must establish commonality. The greater the commonality,
the greater the potential for connection and communication
. . . People are open to those who are open to them.

58

CONTENTS

Implement A Change Program

“Wow, Ghada, thanks for sharing this. This is a delightful piece of
information,” Moza said.
“Yes, we all need to keep this in mind. Definitely, we’ll be great
communicators,” added Fatima, the chief SHEngineering officer.
Moza breathed a big huff and said, “Thanks, ladies. Shall we move
on to step 5?”
“Yes, sure,” they replied.
Step 5: Remove obstacles.
Step 6: Create short-term wins.
Step 7: Build on change.
She stopped for a moment and said, “Ahmed Babiker will like step
eight.”
He looked at her with a smile.
She said, “Step 8: Anchor the changes in corporate culture.”
He clapped and gave her a big smile.
“Thank you,” I said. “This is a genius weapon. There’s not an iota
of doubt that if implemented in the right order, these steps can do
wonders. Don’t you guys think so?” I asked.
“Company culture is deceptive,” the chief culture officer added.
“Culture isn’t about the weekly happy hours or holding hands around
a campfire. Neither is culture a byproduct of team activities and team
lunches.”
“What do you mean, Ahmed Babiker?” I asked.
“Sir, allow me to explain further, with the help of a story.” He
continued, “In 1997, Enron sent out a regular shareholder letter. On
the first page of the letter, Enron listed its core values. Number one
was ‘integrity.’ The company even had it carved into the marble at its
headquarters building.”
Everyone was listening to him.
He continued, “Values only matter if you live them on a daily
basis. You must be willing to hire and fire by them. You need to be
willing to make tough decisions. It’s not okay to have a star performer, our best sales guy or our best engineer, who doesn’t adhere to our
values. That’s like what Enron did. There can be no exceptions.”
59

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

I smiled at him and said, “Bravo! You are on point, Ahmed Babiker.
At a company, values only matter if you actually do something with
them. I like what Flavio Martins wrote in his book titled Win the
Customer: 70 Simple Rules for Sensational Service, about Google’s
corporate culture:
It’s really the people that make Google the kind of company it is. We hire people who are smart and determined, and
we favor ability over experience. Although Googlers share
common goals and visions for the company, we hail from
all walks of life and speak dozens of languages, reflecting the
global audience that we serve.
“I feel the eight-steps of Kotter change management is pretty
basic, simple, and easy to implement,” the chief imagineering officer
pointed out.
I replied, “As former CEO of General Electric, Jack Welch, once
said in an interview,
“You would not believe how difficult it is to be
simple and clear.
People are afraid that they may be seen a simpleton.
In reality, just the opposite is true.”
“I think these eight-steps will nudge even the resistive ones—the ones
who don’t buy-into new ideas easily,” the chief SHEngineering officer
affirmed.
“Yes, I agree with you, Fatima. This model boils down to people—
it’s about people,” the chief efficienology officer added.
The chief FinTech officer said, “In fact, the very reason that we’ve
gathered here today—in the form of a strong high-performance
team—and are having an honest dialogue/discussion indicates that
we’re already applying change management. Isn’t it?”
“That’s step 1, create a sense of urgency, and step 2, form a powerful coalition,” the chief sustainalytics officer said enthusiastically
while flipping through the pages of the book.
60

CONTENTS

Implement A Change Program

She continued, “And we should also count step 5, remove obstacles. Aren’t we here to identify and remove roadblocks/obstacles to
successful projects?”
“Hold on a second.” The chief knowledge officer chimed in.
“Remember the old adage,
“Don’t put the cart before the horse.”
“What do you mean?” the chief imagineering officer inquired.
Syeda replied eloquently, “Don’t do things out of the proper order.
The horse pulls the cart, the cart doesn’t pull the horse.”
She continued, “Just to remind you all, Kotter’s eight-step model
is not a jump-start process—it’s a ‘prescription’ process. There is a big
difference.”
The team rolled their eyes, but I knew that the chief knowledge
officer can pull it off with panache.
“What is a ‘prescription’ process?” asked Jose, the chief FinTech
officer.
Jose is known for his stolid, phlegmatic, and unemotional nature.
The chief knowledge officer jumped in and said, “Sir, I’d like to
answer this question, with your permission.”
“Go ahead,” I replied.
She continued, “A prescription process means we must follow the
order of Kotter’s eight-step model religiously, the way we follow a
prescription handed to us by our physician.”
She added, “Now tell me, has anyone ever mixed up the dosage
mentioned on the prescription?”
“No way, we can’t. The wrong dose can worsen the ailment,”
replied the chief culture officer, throwing his hands in the air.
“Spot-on!” she replied. “We need to play safe with the eight-step
model. A quick look at the steps shows that it works on a waterfall
mode. The outcome of the previous step cascades over to the next
step.”
“The prescription process and waterfall model. How nice to be
introduced to new knowledge,” the chief flexitricity officer murmured.

61

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Can I have your attention? Please look at the smart screen and the
infographic it contains,” I said.

1




2

  


3

 


4


 

5

 


6

 


7

 


8


 

The chief imagineering officer added, “Yes, we use this lexicon in project management practices. In a waterfall model, each phase must be
completed before the next phase can begin, and there is no overlapping of the phases.”
“Bingo. You covered it all,” the chief knowledge officer replied
enthusiastically.
“Kudos. The challenge, however, is not just to become aware of
or practice these steps occasionally; rather, it’s to make them a habit
or, what I love to call, automatic behaviors,” I said, looking at both
ladies.
“Thank you, sir,” everyone replied.
My eyes widened.

62

CONTENTS

CHAPTER ELEVEN

THE SEWA PROJECT
MANAGEMENT MODEL

Creating a Project Model that Works
I thought, As a leader, my role is all about engaging with employees at an
emotional level. They have to see the change; they have to feel the change.
They have to be the change agents! Yet, the killer questions are how does
this model translate to the frontline, and how do we make it operational?
And quickly!
“Team, I have a genius weapon to aid your project journey. I have
devised a project management model based on SEWA’s principles,
cultural core values, and my experience with project leadership. The
presentation will help prepare you and others on your team for longterm success.”
“That’s music to our ears,” the chief efficienology officer quipped.
“Prepare yourselves, for I will now present some profound material. Here you go, then. The image will speak for itself. Have a deep
look. Create a visual representation of it in your mind, and then experience it. The effect can be nothing short of transformational.”
“We are all excited to see the full model,” the chief greenification
officer said.
I replied, “They say an elephant never forgets. Well, you are not
elephant. Take notes constantly and save interesting thoughts. And,
remember the old adage,
“An ounce of action is worth a ton of theory.”
63

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

The rest of this chapter gives a quick overview of each of our SEWA
project management steps, and the remainder of the book describes
them in greater detail.
“Ready? Let’s get started!” I said while showing them the SEWA
project management model image on the smart screen.
The room filled with excitement.
I announced, “By now, your mind must have explored the dynamics of the model. Remember, my goal is to encourage you to achieve
breakthrough results, not dictate to you how to achieve them. So, I
urge you to give them a fair hearing.”
The team had begun to grasp the full spectrum of the colorful
image in front of them on the screen.
Their gleaming eyes evinced that they loved the SEWA project
management model.
The chief FinTech officer asked, “I am a hard-nosed, realistic,
profit-minded manager. As they say, great results speak infinitely
louder than perfect ideas. So, more than the process, I am interested in
financial results. Could you elaborate more on what you are saying?”
We could sense the puffed up pride in his voice.
He continued, “So, let’s come straight to the bottom-line: money.”
He stopped for a moment and then continued, asking, “What is
the success rate of this model? And how soon could we see plausible,
tangible outcomes?”
“I guess. It’s a project model and not a profit model,” the chief
flexitricity officer quipped with a laugh.
The chief FinTech officer shrugged his answer.
I replied, “W. Edwards Deming, the management and quality
guru, said it best when he told executives,
“Managing a company by looking at financial data is the
equivalent of driving a car by looking in the rearview mirror.”
I smiled and continued, “No matter what your mission is, have
some notion in your head. Forget the model, whether it’s no-profit
or profit. Ask yourself the more important question: Is my project

64

CONTENTS

The Sewa Project Management Model

improving performance? Are we sure about it? Seek to answer these
questions all the time. And, if your answer is no, change your mission.”
The chief FinTech officer smiled and replied, “All of us profit from
being corrected!” He continued, “Thank you for changing my perception towards managing projects.”
The team giggled.
I said, “You are most welcome, Jose. Here’s another piece of advice, next time your mind sways toward profit, remind yourself of the
lovely quote by James Rouse:
“Profit is not the legitimate purpose of business. The legitimate purpose of business is to provide a product or service
that people need and do it so well that it›s profitable.”
The team sat spell-bound and listened to me.
The chief imagineering officer said curiously, “I wonder, if it’s too
good to be true.” She continued, “I have heard you speaking very
highly about this model in your Alleem Business Congress events.
Since then, the model has fascinated me, and I have wanted to know
more about it.”
She said in an excited tone, “I can’t believe that today, I am going
to learn about this model from the master himself.”
I replied, “Well, I have used this proven model to deal with
projects, big or small, but we can get to that later. Let’s begin with
the basics.”
I looked around the room and said, “Let’s move on to explore the
marvellous model further through my eyes.”
The team members nodded their heads in agreement.
I got to my feet and began to walk around the room. “Take a look
at this, and keep this as your screen saver to remind you,” I said.
I clicked the pointer and read the highlighted text in one breath.
The SEWA project management model consists of five stages,
with stage-gate reviews between each stage, and performance
monitoring encircling the model from the start to the end.

65

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“I want you all to take a screenshot of this project management model
so that you can read and reread what I just said out loud, until being
a project leader becomes second nature to you in your project roles at
work, in your home, and in the community,” I said with a grin.
“Well, the meeting is getting interesting,” the chief design-thinking officer announced.
“It’s really quite easy,” I said with a smile.
“Absolutely,” said the chief greenification officer. “But, before
talking about my thoughts on the project management model, let me
ask you a question. May I?”
“Ask away,” I said.
“How would you measure the success of each stage of your model?” she asked.
“Each stage is different, and each has its own success criteria,” I
replied, “So, all five stages should to be handled in uniquely different
ways.”
“Sounds so interesting!” she exclaimed.
The chief knowledge officer interrupted and said in an excited
tone, “There’s a saying we use around here that says it all:
“Different strokes for different folks.”
“Well said, Syeda,” I added, “How about moving on to the next slide
. . . hmm, look! Coincidentally, it explains the performance monitoring bit.”
With that, I turned to my laptop, showed the slide that read
‘performance monitoring,’ and turned to my project leadership team.
Read on to enjoy the interesting conversation that we are starting
very soon. Go get yourself a cup of coffee. You won’t regret it.

66

CONTENTS

CHAPTER TWELVE

PERFORMANCE
MONITORING

I began by saying, “Welcome aboard. Here is the first part of the
presentation; it’s about Performance Monitoring. I want you to
remember what Lao-Tzu once said,
“If you wish to be out front,
then act as if you were behind.”
I said, “Performance monitoring is an ongoing process at the heart
of the SEWA project management model. This starts at the inception of the project and continues throughout the model’s stages. It
encompasses both the control and follow-up of a project in relation
to function, time, and cost, as well as stakeholders’ perception of the
project.”
In a nondescript black suit, white shirt, and red tie, with an IPAD
in hand, engineer Hassan, the chief flexitricity officer, was looking
around at each of the team members. As the team browsed the paper
in front of them, he browsed them. His gaze roamed like a spotlight.
He winked at me and said, “I guess, data is the key here.” His
answer was as inviting as the whiff of morning coffee.
I smiled and replied, “Let me remind you of W. Edwards Deming’s famous quote,
“Without data, you are just another person
with an opinion.”

67

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

The chief FinTech officer exclaimed, “Data matters enormously, but
sometimes, we spend so much time trying to make sense of the data
and debating whether it is right that we never get around to exploring
what it means to the business.”
He is keenly aware of the problem, I thought.
I replied, “My objective, here, is to spotlight the little-noticed and
underappreciated activities that entail performance monitoring—say,
generating reports.”
The chief flexitricity officer said, “We generate dozens of reports
every year for several projects.” He continued, “We’ve stitched together our performance monitoring on blood, sweat, and Excel spreadsheets. It’s a nightmare!”
“Too often, however, we try to address the issue as if it were mainly
a software issue. Absolutely not,” the chief sustainalytics officer said.
I could sense that things were beginning to spiral out of control. I
wanted to communicate thoughts and ideas effectively, in a way that
connected with my people and moved them to take action.
I cleared my throat and said, “Well, there is a sea of difference in
quantitative data and qualitative data. We need both for performance
monitoring. And,” I continued, “in my opinion, a project’s health
depends heavily on qualitative data, for example, the team’s morale or
feelings about the status or difficulty of a given task. This must also
be collected.”
The team looked exasperated.
Afra, our chief efficienology officer, added, “That would require
going line-by-line through the project plan—taking every last nuance
and pushing it to an even higher level of operational proficiency.”
Ahmed Babiker, our chief culture officer, added, “Not to forget
that we must ensure that every bit of the project is grounded at the
highest level of ethics and integrity.”
I smiled, and said, “Bravo team. I am impressed with your level of
understanding.”
The chief imagineering officer waved her hand and said, “Dear
team, I’ve been involved in SEWA projects for quite some time. I
can vouch for the fact that there are colossal challenges in managing
projects. There were times when I was at my wit’s end!”
68

CONTENTS

Performance Monitoring

The room listened to her in silence.
She looked around the room and continued, “Deliverables must
be completed according to a schedule, which is usually aggressive, and
within a budget, which is usually fixed.”
She paused to catch some breath.
She began again, “That’s only the tip of the iceberg. In dire straits,
we’ve suffered scope creep in most cases.”
“Whoa,” the team echoed.
The chief greenification officer inquired, “Thanks, May, for sharing
the complications. But, can you tell us more about the term ‘scope
creep’ and how can we prevent it? I am an expert, but I know only of
creeper plants that grow in my garden!”
All of us laughed.
May replied, “In project management, scope creep refers to changes
and continuous or uncontrolled growth in a project’s scope at any
point after the project begins.”
I decided to add something to the conversation, “Voila! There you
are. Bang on! May, thank you very much for bringing this up. Nothing but ‘performance monitoring’ helps to prevent scope creep.”
I continued, “And performance monitoring ensures that the
project accomplishes what it sets out to do on time and within the
allotted budget. This allows us to make the necessary adjustments
regarding resource and budget allocation. Furthermore, it clarifies any
comparisons made between our original plan and current progress.”
The team listened to me in awe.
“But, don’t fret, performance monitoring is not rocket science.
Just keep a few important tools handy, and you’ll come out with
flying colors,” I said.
“That’s great news for all of us. Please share the tools with us. We’ll
take a note of it,” the chief flexitricity officer responded while lifting
his pen to jot down notes on his writing pad.

69

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

C H A P T E R T hirteen

THE SECRET

I moved on to the next slide.
The slide read: “Task Management.”
The chief sustainalytics officer said in excitement, “Wow, it’s just
one single tool. I had thought that you would bring to us a long list
of every possible tool that exists.”
“Couldn’t agree more. I had the same feelings,” the chief FinTech
officer added, nodding his head.
I grinned and replied in a comforting tone, “Projects are made up
of tasks, and knowing how to manage your tasks (and everyone else’s)
is the secret to getting your projects completed on time. At its simplest,
task management is having a ‘to-do list,’ but you’ll soon find that that
method isn’t going to cut it for managing project workloads.”
I paused to check their reaction. They looked cool, calm, and
collected.
I added, “And, yes, don’t be tricked by this slide. I do have more
tools to share, but I will reveal them one at a time, when needed.”
“So, before I delve deep into task management, let me ask you a
simple question: ‘Why manage tasks’?”
“We can’t be efficient if all we do is react to whoever shouts the
loudest at work. We can’t be efficient purely by answering the next
email in our inbox,” the chief culture officer replied promptly.
I said, “I agree. We have to manage our tasks as a group in a lean
way and manage our time to spend the right amount of time working
on the priority tasks. And, that means staying off social media until
the work is done.”
70

CONTENTS

THE SECRET

I continued, “Task management is a way of describing how we
identify, monitor, and progress the work that we need to do during
the project.”
“Do you mean task management keeps us on top of all our work
and helps our team hit their deadlines?” the chief sustainalytics officer
asked.
I replied, “Of course, and above all, we can keep a balanced workload so that we can adjust or delegate tasks and deadlines so that none
of us are overworked.”
“That’s music to our ears,” the chief FinTech officer said with a
smile.

71

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

C H A P T E R fourteen

GO/NO-GO DECISIONS
“Sir, you’ve explained the importance of performance monitoring
quite explicitly. And, we are in complete tandem with your thoughts,”
the chief sustainalytics officer said.
He continued, “However, how should we decide when to begin
the next project phase?”
Moza, the chief restructuring officer added, “Or, how to accept,
reject, or redirect the project?”
I clicked on the pointer to move to the next slide and replied with
a smile, “To make my job easier, when deciding whether to accept or
reject a project, I consider the following critical questions:
• Does the project present a sound commercial argument?
(Let’s weigh the pros and cons.)
• What are the risks involved? (Let’s evaluate the risks.)”
“This is splendid. Thanks for sharing this valuable information,” the
chief imagineering officer responded with awe.
She continued, “Do we also conduct stage-gate reviews here?”
The chief culture officer interrupted, “Wait a moment team. Go
slow. I am not familiar with these technical jargons. I will need some
time to wrap my head around them.”
“What is stage-gate or tollgate review? Do they mean the same
thing? And, why do we need them?” the chief FinTech officer asked
while raising his hand.

72

CONTENTS

Go/No-Go Decisions

I paused and then replied, “Yes, stage-gate and tollgate are the same
thing. The question was, ‘why perform stage-gate/tollgate reviews?’
My answer has always been logical and simple; the project phases
are connected by virtual stage-gates. These gates are used so that the
business/organization plans and executes projects in discrete phases.”
“That’s quite interesting. I am amused,” Moza said. “However, do
we really need them for specific purposes?”
I looked at May, the chief imagineering officer, and signalled her
to answer.
She grabbed a marker and, moving towards the whiteboard,
replied, “Let me shed some light here. At the completion of each
stage, before we transition to the next stage, the stage-gate review
serves the following purposes:
• Validate the project’s relevance.
• Confirm the acceptance of project risks.
• Help stakeholders assess the plan, options, and risks.
• Make a ‘go/no-go’ decision about continuing to the next stage.
• Approve, redirect, or cancel the project.”
She wrote these bullet points on the whiteboard.

Stage-Gate Keeper
“This looks like a lot of work. Must need someone tough to carry it
out,” the chief efficienology officer said.
May replied, “You are right. That’s the reason we have stage-gate
keepers.”
“Who are they, and what is their role?” the chief culture officer
inquired.
I said, “Bingo! Good question, and here is the answer. At each
stage-gate review, the continuation of a project is decided by a stagegate keeper (typically, a team member working on the project) who
is skilled and has the appropriate knowledge and expertise. At each
stage, you’ll want to know whether it is still viable.”
73

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Isn’t he the project manager?” the chief flexitricity officer asked.
“He or she is not necessarily the project manager,” I replied. “The
stage-gate keeper answers the following questions:
• What technical/non-technical work needs to be done at each
stage?
• When are the deliverables to be generated at each stage?
• Who is involved at each stage?
• How to control and approve each phase?
If the emerging evidence says to move on—move on!”
“That’s cool!” the chief knowledge officer exclaimed.
I continued, “His or her decision is based on the information
available at the time, after analyzing the business case, and on the
risks involved and the availability of necessary resources (e.g., budget,
other resources, and competent staff).”
I added, “Don’t think his job is easy. His questioning is systematic,
disciplined, and deep and usually focused on issues and problems. In
short, he digs beneath the surface of the issues.”
“The stage-gate keeper as flashing his beefed-up muscle like an
invincible Sumo wrestler. He makes it a point that to get a green
signal, the project team has to defeat him by answering his questions.
Looking at him, the team wish they had Aladdin’s genie to answer the
questions and defeat the sumo wrestler-like stage-gate keeper. The
following four challenging questions are asked of the team by the
stage-gate keeper.”
1. Have you incorporated lean management into your process? If
yes, then how?
2. How did you intend to incorporate value engineering?
3. What about systems thinking? Did you consider the big picture?
4. Which principles of target value design would you implement?
The chief SHEngineering officer said, “Whoa, these are tough nuts
to crack.”
74

CONTENTS

Go/No-Go Decisions

“Yes, but they are imperative and crucial. No worries; the technical
jargon is explained in the upcoming slides,” I replied.
Everyone nodded in agreement.
“Now, let’s get back to the model. Are you guys ready?” I asked.
They answered, “Yes, surely.”

75

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

STAGE

1

Imagineering
I was feeling like a runner about to run an important race— every
muscle taut, totally concentrated on the race ahead.
“Let me remind you all of our SEWA project management model.
It consists of the five performing stages. Please pay attention to the
screen,” I said, looking at my project team.
“The SEWA project management model comprises five stages,” I
said while pointing at the screen.
1. Imagineering
2. Ecomagination

3. CRItRAL thinking

4. Execution
5. Knowledge capture and storage
“Each stage contains tasks and the knowledge and skills that are
required to competently perform these tasks,” I said. “Now, let me
start with stage 1.” I clicked my pointer to next slide.
It read “Imagineering.”
“Whoa, more new creative jargon!” the chief culture officer was
quick to point out.
“Well, definitely a creative term, but not a new term,” I answered.
I continued, “The term has been around for quite some time now.”
“What does it mean?” the chief greenification officer asked.
“You’ll be amused to know that imagineering is an old technique
that has been used by numerous big corporations around the world,
76

CONTENTS

Imagineering

with Disney being one of the most famous examples, in its combination of the words imagination and engineering,” I said.
“Imagineering means the implementation of creative ideas into
practical forms. In other words, imagineering is letting your imagination soar and then engineering it back down to Earth,” I continued.
I could feel the engagement of my team.
“Let’s get back to business. In PowerPoint presentations, all
projects can be made to look simple and easy to manage, when in
reality the situation is much more complex. Failure to see those
complexities leads to the underestimation of schedule and budget, plus
a host of other ailments. In my view, any project is created twice. The
first creation is the mental creation, while the second is the physical
creation. The Imagineering process enables us to visualize both
creations and witness success,” I said.
“I totally agree with you, sir,” Masud, the chief sustainalytics
officer said.
“Let’s talk about each one separately,” I said.

Visualization
“Listen. SEWA embeds the principle of “learning before, during,
and after” in each and every program and project’s life cycle. Most
humans are visual creatures, anyway. Visualization is the ability to
see the mental creation of the project. Visualizing allows the SEWA
project team to understand the scheduling situation so that they can
react or respond within a short period of time, according to whether
the input conditions change or not. Thus, visualizing helps managers
make difficult decisions, even in unstructured environments,” I said.
“Thank you, sir, very clear now.” Masud said.
I cleared my throat and said, “Project management is an everevolving discipline. A lot has changed since the time I did a crash course
on project management at the Stephen Covey Institute back in the
early 2000s. At the time, I had just been promoted to an executive
role, but my interest in project management pushed me to take up
that crash course.”
77

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Wow. We admire your unrelenting quest of knowledge,” Hassan,
the chief flexitricity officer said.
I replied, “Remember the wonderful advice,
“Leap—and the net will appear.”
I continued, “project management still interests me, and I keep myself updated by reading most of the latest discoveries in this field. One
such new tool that impressed me was ‘The CUSP-Tool,’ which is a
premortem tool introduced by Gary Klein. I have summarized the tool
in the next slide.”
In a project premortem, prior to the project launch, the project team imagines the project has failed and brainstorms all
of the reasons that could lead to this failure. The team then
develops plans to mitigate these reasons for failure. After
that, the team has an intensive discussion about the pitfalls.
I continued, “At SEWA, we need to adapt the CUSP-Tool.”
Hassan inquired, “What does that stand for, sir? And what does
that mean?”
I replied, “The Comprehensive Unit-based Safety Program (CUSP)
is a method that can help this project team make projects safer by
combining improved teamwork, best practices, and the science of
safety. The tool is expected to reap enormous benefits. Moreover, it
can pave our way towards the ‘initiation’ phase of SEWA projects.”
“Hmm, interesting,” a few of the team members hummed.

Initiation
I said, “Now let me take you to the initiation phase, which takes place
at the beginning of any project. In this phase, the idea for the project
is explored and elaborated. The goal of this phase is to examine the
feasibility of the project. In addition, decisions are made concerning
who is assigned to carry out the project, which party (or parties) will
78

CONTENTS

Imagineering

be involved, and whether the project will have an adequate base of
support among those involved.”
“At this time, I feel the need for a tried and tested tool. As one of
my philosophies says:
“We cannot solve today’s problems
with yesterday’s solutions.”
Hence, I clamped my fist “on the word BOSCARD”. Let’s find
out more about it.”

Boscard
“The BOSCARD is a strategic planning tool used to give the terms
of reference for new projects. The acronym stands for background,
objectives, scope, constraints, assumptions, risks, and deliverables.
These headings are typical in terms-of-reference and project initiation
documents.”
“Let me give a little more explanation of the tool. Are you all
ready?” I asked.
“Yes, we are,” they responded.
Background: Provide background information that includes the
reasons for creating the project and mentions the key stakeholders
who will benefit from the project’s outcome.
Objectives: Describes the project goals and links each of them with
related S.M.A.R.T.E.R project objectives.
“Ladies and gentlemen. Remember: when initiating a project, it
is important that all the parties involved agree upon a detailed list of
objectives the project is expected to achieve before it’s started. Failure
to obtain formal agreement almost always leads to some expectations
not being met,” I said.

Define Crystal Clear Goals
“Sir, before we leave this point, can we just talk about goals and objectives? I feel it is important in managing projects’ milestones,” the chief
imagineering officer asked.
79

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

I answered, “Most of us have set goals for ourselves in life. Goals
help us to focus our minds on achieving what we set out to do. Most
of us are aware that blurry goals lead to blurry places and that setting
goals makes us more likely to attain what we want. As the saying goes,
“Without having a goal, it’s difficult to score.”
I continued, “However, to become self-fulfilling prophecies, our goals
should be realistic and achievable, as we all know that ‘dangling the
carrot just beyond the donkey’s reach’ will eventually make him give
up trying and settle for lower results than he is capable of achieving.
“Having said that, the struggle may become easier if your goals
are well thought out; people set S.M.A.R.T goals. At SEWA, we have
taken this concept further by creating S.M.A.R.T.E.R goals,” I said.
“I have heard of S.M.A.R.T goals but never heard of
S.M.A.R.T.E.R.,” the chief greenification officer responded.
I said, “The acronym S.M.A.R.T.E.R has many variations, including this one on your screen:

S—Specific, significant, stretching.
M—Measurable, meaningful, motivational.
A—Attainable, action-oriented, agreed upon.
R—Realistic, relevant, result-oriented.
T—Timely, tangible, traceable.
E—Explicit, encouraging.
R—Resolving, radical.
I continued, “Usually, a S.M.A.R.T.E.R session is followed by constructing an action plan to seize the opportunity at hand. What would
happen if the action plan didn’t work? We change the plan but never
the goal. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a rock-solid goal and
remain open to altering the plan, both when and if required.”
Syeda added, “Being a utility giant, SEWA has a lot of short-term
and long-term projects to execute.”
“Yes, but always focus on the WIG.”
“WIG?” Masud, the chief sustainalytics officer, inquired.
80

CONTENTS

Imagineering

“Wildly Important Goals,” I replied with a chuckle. “Great! Let’s
keep moving. Now we are all at the ‘scope’ station,” I said. “What do
I mean by that? Can anyone answer me?” I asked.
Hassan replied, “I think the scope here refers to the part of project
planning that involves determining and documenting a list of specific
project goals, deliverables, features, functions, tasks, deadlines, and,
ultimately, costs. In other words, it is what needs to be achieved and
the work that must be done to deliver a project.”
“Absolutely right! Let’s have a look on the Scope slide,” I said.
The Scope slide read,
Scope: Provide a high-level description of the features and functions that characterize the product, service, or result the project is
meant to deliver.
I could see their eyeballs moving from left to right.
“If there’s no questions. I’ll be moving to the constraints phase,” I
said.
“Please do so, sir,” they answered.
Constraints: Identify the specific constraints or restrictions that
limit or place conditions on the project, especially those associated
with project scope.
The whole team was paying attention. So I moved on to explaining
the rest of the phases.
Assumptions: Specify all factors that are, for planning purposes,
considered to be true. During the planning process, these assumptions
will be validated.
Risks: Outline the risks identified at the start of the project.
Include a quick assessment of the significance of each risk and how to
deal with it.
“Sir, thanks for sending us to the ISO-31000 Risk Management
crash course at our SEWA Academy last week,” the chief SHEngineering officer said.
I smiled, then asked, “Can anyone tell me the name of the fastest
company in history to reach $100 billion in sales?”
“Yes, I heard the news last week, it’s Amazon,” the chief FinTtech
officer pointed out, raising his hands.
81

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“And what’s the secret behind such sweeping success?” I asked.
The project team looked at each other; some of them were even
shrugging their shoulders.
I said, “Jeff Bezos, the founder and CEO of Amazon, leverages
‘risk’ and has created an exceptional culture of experimentation and
invention.”
I continued, “He believes you don’t grow if you’re not willing to
take risks, and he constantly evaluates Amazon’s ‘ROR.’”
“ROR!” the chief FinTech officer exclaimed. “What does it stand
for?”
“Return on risk,” I said in an amused tone.
“Well, this is great news. Thank you, sir, for sharing this new concept with us. I’ve been in the finance sector for over a decade now. I
have heard of ROI—return on investment—but never heard of ROR,
return on risk.”
“Well, if you want to deep dive into ROR, Jeff Bezos has detailed
and outlined his approach to risk and his growth strategies in his
annual letters to Amazon’s shareholders that articulate how Bezos and
Amazon use risk to their advantage.” I said.
“Wow,” the team said unanimously.
“Now let’s proceed,” I said.
Deliverables: Define the key deliverables the project requires to
achieve the stated objectives.
“At this station, we ask several other questions, such as ‘Why this
project? Why at this time? What are our expected results?’ Then, we
set the expected deliverables.”
“The nice thing about the BOSCARD is that it provides a quick
way of delivering all the necessary project information to the stakeholders without having to complete a full project initiation document,” the chief imagineering officer said.
“It’s a lot more digestible for busy stakeholders who might not have
time to wade through a lengthy project initiation document when
looking for a quick but detailed overview of the proposed project,”
said the chief flexitricity officer.
I glanced at the team and said, “Next, we formulate our project
charter. But before we proceed, let’s take a mini break. All of us will
82

CONTENTS

Imagineering

get back here in thirty minutes. All right?” I said and stood up to leave
the room.
“Where are you going, sir?” May, the chief imagineering officer,
asked me.
“Don’t you remember? Today, we have a delegation of 24 MBA
students from the Institute of Technology University, New York,
visiting our head office and our Layyah Power Station University as a
part of the UAE World Youth Leadership program,” I replied.
“Oh, yes,” she said.
The team came back after the break.

Project Charter
The project charter slide was displaying the following definition:
A project charter is a formal, typically short document that
describes our project in its entirety in terms of what the objectives are, how they will be carried out, and who the stakeholders are. It is a crucial ingredient in planning out the project because it is used throughout the project lifecycle.

“Sir, what does it consist of?” Hassan asked.
I replied, “The project charter varies in specific content but typically
documents the following:
• Reasons for the project’s initiation
• Benefits of the project
• Objectives and constraints of the project
• High-level scope statement describing all expected deliverables
• Who the main stakeholders are
• Identified risks
• General overview of the budget”

83

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“If I may, where do we start now?” Fatima, the chief SHEngineering
officer, asked.
“Brilliant question,” I said. “As Alec Mackenzie wrote,
“Taking action without thinking things through is
a prime source of problems.”
“Remember team,” I added, “your ability to make good plans before
you act is a measure of your overall competence. Planning is imperative to everything. You may have heard of the Six-P Formula.”
“Hmm, no sir,” the chief imagineering officer said in a hushed
tone.
“The Six-P Formula says, ‘Proper Prior Planning Prevents Poor
Performance.’”
Syeda, the chief knowledge officer, commented, “It sounds simple,
but is it really as simple as it appears to be?”
I replied, “Planning is really quite simple to do. All you need is
a piece of paper and a pen. The most sophisticated Outlook system,
computer app, or time planner is based on the same principle. It is
based on your sitting down and making a list of everything you have
to do before you begin.”
Syeda added, “I always work from a list. When something new
comes up, I add it to the list before I do it.”
I added, “That’s great.”
I continued, “Now let me tell you about another fruitful technique. This will help you to get to the root of the problem, and it will
come in very handy while you are planning your project.”

The Five Whys
“At this stage of the project, I felt we should conduct The Five Whys,
also known as ‘root cause analysis.’ I have shared a self-explanatory
infographic on screen. It is simple, yet effective, and is guaranteed to
reap enormous benefits for SEWA.

84

CONTENTS

Imagineering

“I studied this in business school long back. I would like to share
with the team what The Five Whys stand for. May I, sir?” Syeda asked.
“Sure, go ahead.” I answered.
“We used this tool in both information gathering and problem
solving,” Syeda said.
• What happened?
• Who was involved?
• Where did it take place?
• When did it take place?
• Why did it happen?
85

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Some authors add a sixth question, ‘how,’ to the list, though ‘how’
can also be covered by ‘what,’ ‘when,’ or ‘where.’
• How did it happen?
“However, you need to mind a few things, such as:
• Each question should have a factual answer.
• None of these questions can be answered with a simple “yes”
or “no.”
• The result is outstanding and breakthrough thinking.
• From the perspective of innovation, this is critical to understand
and will help you get the best from yourself, your colleagues,
and your boss.”

Embrace the Socrates Mindset
The term “philosopher” comes from the ancient Greek, meaning
“lover of wisdom.”
So, what is Socrates’ mindset?
In the words of Socrates,
“An unexamined life is not worth living.”
The spirit of the Socratic mindset pertains to a method employed
by Socrates to unravel commonly held beliefs by exposing the unquestioned presuppositions that uphold them, giving rise to consistent,
informed, and potentially unorthodox positions on complex issues.
Socrates was dedicated to excavating complex philosophical, political,
and social issues in order to rediscover reason and curiosity.
The asking of quality questions is the true purpose of philosophy.
• Why do we do things this way?
• Where do you want to go and where don’t you want to go?
“Sir, with your experience in managing projects and using project
management tools, techniques, and methodologies, what advice you
can pass to us here?” Masud asked.
86

CONTENTS

Imagineering

1. Value Engineering: Value engineering includes taking an
in-depth look at the functions of any equipment, facilities,
services, systems, and materials used in the project. This part
of project management requires an analysis to be performed on
each of these components. When analyzing these components,
managers will be looking for ways to improve cost effectiveness
without negatively affecting the quality, reliability, performance,
or reputation of the product or service.
“What were the other terms Jose, the chief FinTech officer mentioned?
I asked.
“It was lean management and…” Ahmed Babiker, the chief culture
officer, replied.
“Systems thinking and something related to design?” Hassan
interrupted.
“I got it, it was value design,” Masud added to what Hassan had
said.
Jose broke in. “No, it is called target value design.”
2. Lean Management: “Lean” refers to the elimination of waste.
However, more importantly, lean means continuous improvement in all work processes. SEWA supports the concept of
continuous improvement, so lean management is a must-have.
Improving the work process(es) of those who do the work, or of
those who are on-the-spot, is the essence of lean management.
3. Systems Thinking: Systems thinking has been defined as
an approach to problem solving that attempts to balance
holistic thinking and reductionistic thinking by taking the
overall system into account, as well as its parts.
4. Target Value Design (TVD): TVD contains three key elements:
1. A feasibility study at the beginning of the project (ideally
with the key project participants) to determine the client’s
values and constraints;

87

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

2. Setting the target cost to the amount that the client is willing or able to pay; and
3. Designing a construction to that target cost.
“Applying these techniques promises to help the projects raise the
number of successful outcomes by allowing the project team to effectively control project costs,” I concluded.
“Alright, now. It’s time for a quick refresher break,” I said. “Go
grab a cup of coffee and let’s get back in fifteen minutes.”

88

CONTENTS

STAGE

2

Ecomagination

After a nice short break, the team gathered again.
Afra, the chief efficienology officer said, “Sir, you look ecstatic.
What’s the news?”
“You are right, Afra, our chairman is effusing with excitement and
elation,” Jose affirmed.
“Please share with us the news,” Ghada, the chief greenification
officer, added.
“It’s great news. This should make us all very proud,” I said.
I continued, “SEWA has embarked on a program to increase power
output and boost efficiency through the adoption of state-of-the-art
power generation facilities, and expansion of the Al Layyah power
plant is part of this initiative. SEWA is building a 1000 Megawatt
(MW) gas-fired combined cycle power plant in the Al Layyah
power plant. To accomplish this ambitious objective, we, on March
28, 2019, signed a buyer’s credit agreement (export loan) totaling
up to approximately $241 USD million with the Japan Bank for
International Cooperation (JBIC, Governor: Tadashi Maeda). This
loan will provide financing for the purchase of a complete set of power
generation equipment, including the gas turbine, manufactured by
Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems, Ltd.”

89

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Great news! Let’s give a standing ovation to our chairman,” Afra
said.
“Thank you all, please be seated,” I said.
“That was a very good piece of information to introduce Stage two,
Ecomagination to all of us,” Ghada added.
I smiled.
“Ecomagination has secured a safe place in business dictionaries
worldwide and is widely used in manufacturing companies. GE first
introduced the term ecomagination to the market on May 9, 2005.
GE describes the term ecomagination as a business strategy to deliver
clean technology solutions that drive positive economic and environmental outcomes for customers and the world,” I continued.

Why Do We Ecomagine?
“Prior to my tenure at SEWA, the organization tended not to adhere
to sustainability principles much. Also, many products, processes, and
projects were not 100% environmentally friendly. Being a sustainalist
(a sustainability specialist), I infused an eco-friendly and environmental psyche in all the functional and manufacturing units of SEWA.
Therefore, we adapted the ecomagination philosophy.
“At SEWA, we strongly believe that whatever innovative products
or services we introduce to the society must be safe and will not harm
either people or the environment. In addition, we aim for our products to help us meet the pressing environmental challenges of today.
“At SEWA, we define ecomagination as the ability of the mind
to be creative or resourceful with the aim to find environmentally
friendly solutions.
“Let me remind you all of our ecomagination principles. Our
ecomagination progress depends on the following five principles:
1. Conscious leadership
2. Co-creation and collaboration with like-minded companies
and suppliers
3. Agile innovation
90

CONTENTS

Ecomagination

4. Lean six sigma principles
5. Advanced technology and digitalization
“Wow! It’s almost too big to digest,” Ghada, the chief greenification
officer said.
“Yes, keeping the above principles in mind, it is important to
ensure that ecomagination is one of the main stages of our project
management model,” I said.

SEWA Ecomagination Statement
The team members were having a side conversations with each other
and enjoying the session when Fatima, the SHEngineering officer,
clapped her hands to have everybody’s attention and said, “Dear
friends, with our chairman’s permission, let me share with you all
about SEWA’s Ecomagination statement, which the chairman has
approved last week. She pressed her clicker, and a very simple slide
went up on the screen. It read as follows:
Ecomagination is SEWA’s top strategic plan to reduce environmental impact at a local scale through providing clean
and green solutions for our community and through our
own operations. As a part of this strategy, we are investing
in cleaner technology and business innovation, developing
solutions with our partners to create a cleaner, greener, and
smarter tomorrow.

“Oh, sounds great. It certainly will position SEWA as a sustainable
organization,” said the chief sustainalytics officer.
“That’s true. But can we expect to see big organizations adopting
that principle?” Asked the chief culture officer.
“Benchmarking. It’s the benchmarking tool that helps here. Let’s
discover it together,” I said.
91

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Benchmarking
“Robert C. Camp, in his book Benchmarking: The Search for Industry
Best Practices that Lead to Superior Performance, states that benchmarking, by way of a working definition, can be best described as ‘The
search for industry best practices that lead to superior performance,’”
I said.
“The definition that I like most is this: Benchmarking encourages
an external view to ensure correctness in setting objectives and developing the internal actions necessary to achieve those objectives. Further, benchmarking also involves key process steps that are indigenous
to any industry,” I said.
“Are we going to benchmark the whole project management process?” Hassan asked.
I answered, “We will be benchmarking in the following areas:
1. Planning: Identify what requires benchmarking.
2. Analysis: Determine the current performance gaps.
3. Integration: Establish functional goals.
4. Action: Develop action plans.
5. Maturity: Practice fully integrating action plans into processes.”

92

CONTENTS

STAGE

3

CRItRAL Thinking
“Now, this slide is so special to me personally,” I said.
“Why?” Hassan said.
“It’s a bold new concept for a creative thinking. It contains my selfcoined term about thinking,” I said.
“I’m looking forward to know more about it,” Masud said.
“Here we go see the slides up,” I said.
“Oh no! What is this? A new lesson!” Jose exclaimed.
“How do we read that? It’s tongue-twisting,” the chief sustainalytics officer said.
“Oh, I like this term,” the chief design thinking officer laughed.
“Before revealing the secret behind this term, let me take you back
to the original two terms of thinking: critical and lateral. It’s blend of
the both,” I said.
“Critical thinking is defined as the objective analysis of facts to
form a judgment, while lateral thinking is…can anyone answer me?”
I asked.
The chief flexitricity officer answered fast. “It is defined as solving
problems through an indirect and creative approach.”
“Bravo! You really deserve a bravo card signed by me for your perfect answer. As a matter of fact, both are vital in and instrumental to
problem-solving situations,” I answered.
“My self-coined term, CRItRAL Thinking, blends both types of
thinking. CRItRAL Thinking is a unique blend of critical and lateral
thinking. Critical thinkers analyze the nitty-gritty of any issue on the

93

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

basis of facts and figures, whereas lateral thinkers—also known as creative thinkers—look beyond face value and come out with solutions
that are not mundane,” I said.
“Doing good does not result in a competitive advantage or cutting
edge anymore. What gives a cutting edge in business is brilliant new
creative ideas, radical innovation, and more disruption,” I continued.
“You mean we need to get more creative ideas?” Jose, the chief
FinTech officer, asked.
I answered, “Yes, we live in a knowledge economy. It is not the
efficiency of our operations that will help us to be an A-class organization but the brilliance of our ideas and how we introduce them to
the market.”
I continued, “Sometimes, asking the right questions to the right
people has the potential to discover and develop great ideas. As inventor
Thomas Edison observed,
“The ideas I use are mostly the ideas of people who don’t
develop them.”
“You know there is a lot more behind these words than what appears
on the surface,” I continued.

Why this Type of Thinking?
“Many people have often asked about the effective use of my
CRItRAL Thinking philosophy. In response, I have always given the
same answer; a utility has both technically and non-technically driven
projects, as well as those that are unique. Depending on the project,
either a linear or a multi-disciplined way of thinking is necessary. To
run them right, you need people with a specialized type of thinking.
This is a major challenge that project managers face most of the time.
If you are a project manager, you will most likely know exactly what I
am talking about! However, fret not, for I have the solution.”
The team listened.
“Now take down the bullet points that you see onscreen in the
front on your notepads,” I said, while clicking the pointer.
94

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

“In short,” I continued, “CRItRAL Thinking is a choice, an
intentional way for you to navigate through your thinking. It’s a tool
that helps leaders and managers to:
• See more possibilities than problems
• Reframe problems and setbacks into possibilities
• Ask ‘why’ and less about ‘what’ and ‘how’
• Turn those ‘what-ifs’ into realities
• Take the time to see the good in each moment and share positive learning with others
• Stretch the thinking around a concept in different directions,
providing a stimulating discussion that will further strengthen
the concept
• Reduce the ‘blind thinking’ spot
• Drive positive change
• Deliver value for the greater good in our rapidly changing
world.”
“Wow, how wonderful!” Syeda exclaimed.
I said, “In our project management model, this was the
teambuilding stage. First, we identified the key purpose of the team,
which may vary from project to project. Some very common reasons
for the team to come together are to interact with each other’s ideas
and share common beliefs and to leverage their collective strengths,
perspectives, skills, and experiences to achieve a set of commonly
shared goals.
“I wanted to unleash my employees’ full creative energies, win
their commitment, and radically improve processes. To be successful,
an innovation process must deliver three things:
1. Superior solutions,
2. Lower risks and costs of change, and
3. Employee buy-in.
95

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Synergy
“Team synergy is attained when the team can collectively generate
more creative ideas than individuals could generate. This phenomenon
occurs through the cross-fertilization of ideas, where an idea or suggestion from one person can stimulate spontaneous ideas and suggestions
from the other team members. As a result, the output is greater than
the input.”
I felt more clarification was needed. I continued, “We just need to
modify our organizational habits, engage everyone around our business, and develop our leadership capability.”

Project Manager
“Sir, in your opinion, how would you define a project manager?”
Ahmed Babiker asked.
“A project manager is a leader with two contradictory qualities:
power and humility. And he or she has the ability to inspire confidence
and support among the people who are needed to achieve project
goals,” I said.
“Power and humility. I like that,” Ahmed Babiker responded.
“And one more thing: a strong project team coupled with the right
skills isn’t enough. A team leader with the right interpersonal capabilities is also paramount. He or she ought to have the perfect mix of
both hard and soft skills—in other words, a brave heart and a brilliant
mind,” I continued.
“No kidding!” Syeda said in awe.
“And what makes a successful project manager?” Ahmed Babiker
asked again.
“Sure, here you go. All of you, note down the list in front on the
screen that details the common SEWA’s eight traits for becoming a
successful project manager.”

96

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

1. Highly intelligent but not cunning.
2. A visionary but also a risk assessor.
3. Forceful but also sensitive to people’s feelings.
4. Dynamic but also patient.
5. Fluent communicator but also a good listener.
6. Decisive but also reflective.
7. Expert in a wide range of different fields.
8. Pioneering but also an expert in task delegation.

A voice came from within. “Any overhaul won’t succeed unless SEWA’s
employees get behind it. The surest route to winning their support is
to involve and engage them in the process of generating ideas to bring
that change.”
As I was lost in these pensive thoughts, Hamda, my chief technovation officer, breezed into my office.
“Pardon me, good morning, sir,” she said in a cheerful tone. “I’ve
come to thank you for giving me the most enjoyable lesson of my life.”
Startled, I replied, “Well, I’m known for giving people the hardest
time of their lives.” I smiled slyly.
“Oh my God, I am thankful again that you’ve marked me off that
list,” she responded gleefully.
No doubt, she was as happy as a lark. And that was a welcome sight.
Her smiling face made me smile. As they say, smiles are contagious!
Her bright eyes, blissful demeanor, and spring-in-the-feet attitude
lifted my spirits.
“Tell me, what news do you have?” I asked cheerfully.
Her face lit up.

97

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Sir, do you remember a couple of weeks ago, you nominated me
to attend a ‘Design Thinking’ workshop in Dubai?” Hamda asked.
“Hmm…yes I do. I remember very well. How did it go?” I asked
enthusiastically.
“Indeed,” she replied. “And I learned a bitter truth.” She paused,
looking at my face, searching for an expression of consent.
“Go on. I’m all ears,” I said.
She said in one breath, “Our project team members generally are
not designers and also aren’t used to doing face-to-face research with
customers, getting deeply immersed in their perspectives, co-creating
with stakeholders, and designing and executing experiments.”
She took another deep breath and continued. “This design-thinking workshop has reshaped my perception of innovation in project
management in profound ways.”
I listened to her silently.
She continued, “You know what, sir? Now I realize that we’ve been
managing projects at the wrong side of innovation.”
“How is that?” I asked, quite awestruck.
“In fact,” she replied, “design thinking takes a different approach:
identify hidden needs by having the innovator live the customer’s
experience. Immersion in user experiences provides raw material for
deeper insights.”
“That’s wonderful.” I remarked.
“Thank you so much for creating the SEWA project management
model. Really proud to work under your leadership, sir,” Hamda said.
I was genuinely pleased with her answer. She had convincingly
elaborated on the entire process of design thinking. Her conviction
sparked an idea in my CRItRAL mind.
How about if I ask her to win over my nine champions and brainwash
them to stop faffing about and do some meaningful innovation in managing their projects? I thought.
“Hamda, you are my glimmer of hope here,” I said. “My nine
champions have excelled in the ‘Imagineering’ and the ‘Ecomagination’ stages of project management. However, they have been at

98

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

loggerheads when it comes to a whole brain thinking process, like my
CRItRAL Thinking philosophy.”
She jumped off her seat and said, “I strongly feel that design thinking will support and compliment the CRItRAL Thinking process in
a big way.”
I said, twisting my wrist, “Sounds great! I want you to hook them
in. What do you think? Can you do it?”
“The pleasure is all mine, sir,” she said in a reaffirming tone. “Let’s
give it a try.”
“Thanks, Hamda,” I said. “Appreciate it. Please proceed to the
‘War of Ideas’ room; I will set up a sit-down with the team in ten
minutes.”
“Are you talking about the corner office with soundproofed glass
walls?” She asked.
“Bravo! You guessed it right,” I replied with a smile. “That’s the
best place for clashes of ideas and disagreement of opposing ideals,
ideologies, or concepts,” I added. “Always remember that the true
spirit of conversation consists in building on each other’s observation,
not overturning it.”
“That’s amazing,” Hamda said in an excited tone. “Finally, I am
getting to see this fancy-named room. I’ve heard colleagues mentioning this room in their chats but never got an opportunity to see it for
real.”
“No worries, your wait is over. Just ten more minutes,” I replied
jovially,
I knew I was dealing with a bunch of bright individuals, and that’s
what counts, I told myself.
There was no grain of doubt in the minds of my team. Now, the
team was prepped for a giant leap—the move onto agile processes.
But they may have had fears of failure. As seen on the TV game show
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? sometimes it really does pay to phone
a friend. Hence, I thought, an excellent way for me to alleviate those
fears is by giving them a chance to talk with another person in their
position who’s happy with Agile and Design Thinking processes.

99

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

War of Ideas Room
Ten minutes later, the team assembled in the ‘War of Ideas’ room.
It’s a room where we make clever choices and positive decisions and
ultimately find fulfillment by noticing the positive details of our relationships. And in this room, I usually discover the right-brain thinkers and the left-brain thinkers. As Blaine Lee Pardoe wisely said,
“Before you attempt to ‘set’ things right,
make sure you ‘see’ things right.”
This lovely quote was helpful to understand that most miscommunication is a result of people’s having different assumptions. ‘The War
of Ideas’ room is the place where we correct those assumptions and
prevent miscommunication.
The nine champions had responded and assembled in the room,
and Hamda was busy writing something on the flip chart.
I set the ball rolling by saying, “Team, I have invited Hamda to
join our meeting. Being SEWA’s chief technovation officer, she would
like to share her experience at a recent design thinking workshop that
she successfully attended in Dubai. She believes this will improve the
quality of your CRItRAL Thinking and bring innovative solutions to
your projects.”
“Another so-called fancy innovation process. We don’t want anything extra—a fifth wheel,” the chief greenification officer said.
“Just listen!” Hamda said. “I didn’t invent the design thinking, I
discovered it—at a training program. Design thinking is an essential
tool for simplifying and humanizing. It can’t be an ‘extra’; it needs
to be a core competence. With design thinking, we help ourselves
to think differently. And this is one of our chairman’s goals, to think
differently. Isn’t it?”
“Well, that’s what all thinking methodologies claim,” the chief
greenification officer replied. “Tell me, what’s new about this one?”
“Design thinking is not just about being creative, but you can really apply your solutions to real-life situations and business situations;
it will give SEWA the shot in the arm it needs,” Hamda answered.
100

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

“Design thinking is a lot of fun. But it’s not only fun. We are solving
really complex problems with design thinking in a creative way and
very fast. And I guessed this what we are looking for now to solve our
projects issues,” she continued.
There was confusion and murmuring in the room.
“Okay, let me explain,” she replied. “For example, applying the
design thinking principles, we would be able to reimagine our existing
processes and products through the lens of the customer. And that
makes the difference. I should say the big difference.”
“I hate to be the one to say this,” the chief FinTech officer quipped,
“but I don’t believe in all that you are saying. It’s simply a tall claim.
How can a better customer experience lead to an improved product
design? I can’t see how this new thinking system can improve our situation. In fact, it will probably make matters worse!”
Hamda winced as she listened to Jose’s last comment.
“If customers were to design our products, we wouldn’t need product engineers, eh? Also, we can’t believe everything that the customers
tell us. Have I made myself clear?” Jose continued.
“What do you mean, it won’t work? Have you ever thought, why
are we actually doing what we are doing? Who are we doing it for?”
Hamda pointed out. She sighed and continued, “Here’s what the
truth is; we’ve become stagnant. We’ve flat-lined mentally. Why aren’t
we looking at things through a fresh lens?” She gave Jose a piercing
look and asked, “When was the last time you had a good thought for
the first time?”
The room went silent as everyone thought.
“Now, you are mincing words. Tell us clearly, what exactly do you
want?” the chief greenification officer asked sternly.
Hamda flashed an uncomfortable smile and said, “All I mean is, to
not do what we usually do, like immediately jump in the solution but
really spend a lot of time on the customer and understand things. In
short, really get into the customers’ needs first.”
I smiled, as I liked what I was hearing. And I thought of jumping
into the conversation to rescue Hamda. “Hamda, why don’t you
explain the complete design thinking process to the team?”
101

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Let me explain it this way,” she said. “We’ll begin with my favorite
definition of design thinking; it goes like this:
Design thinking draws upon logic, imagination, intuition,
and systematic reasoning to explore possibilities of what
could be and to create desired outcomes that benefit the customer. A design mindset is not problem-focused; it’s solution-focused and action oriented. It involves both analysis
and imagination.
I stood up and said, “My champions, authors James Manktelow and
Julian Birkinshaw explained in their book, 100 Ways To Be a Better Boss
that traditionally, many companies approach product development
through technological innovation. They work on what is technically
feasible in an R&D laboratory, and they get designers and marketers
involved in the latter stages of the process to help make the product
more visually appealing, or to position it in an attractive way.
“The book also claims that, although this approach isn’t wrong,
it has significant limitations. It is very common for R&D people to
work on technologically interesting problems regardless of whether
they have any value in the marketplace; this technology-centered approach often results in over-engineered or ill-conceived products.”
I continued, “In today’s competitive markets, a more thoughtful
approach to innovation is required. In most business-to-consumer
(B2C) markets, customers search out end-user ratings and product
reviews online and use them to choose between the many options
available to them. In these cases, underlying technologies are often
relatively unimportant because many organizations can master them
and integrate them well. What really matters is how the product meets
a customer’s practical and emotional needs. For this to happen, the
development process needs to be driven by a deep understanding of
customer needs right from the start.”
The team listened with intense attention.

102

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

The Art of Thinking
“Dear colleagues,” Hamda said. “I do appreciate your concern over
using the design thinking tool. At the same time, I do respect His
Excellency Dr. Rashid, our chairman’s, decision in using his coined
term, CRItRAL Thinking as one of the stages in the SEWA project
management model. I can clearly see a gap here, and that needs to be
bridged. This is where an approach called design thinking is useful,
pioneered as early as 1969 and more recently championed by the
California design agency IDEO.
“The design thinking process can be simplified to the seven key
steps split into three phases. Allow me to take you through this lovely
journey. Are you ready?” she asked.
“We’re all ears,” the team answered.
“The first phase is called the inspiration phase. Look at the slide up
here, please,” she requested.
Inspiration Phase

• Understand the business problem and constraints.
• Empathize with users’ problem and experience.
• Understand what the organization can do.

“I am done with the inspiration phase and moving to the second
phase—Ideation,” she continued.

Ideation Phase

• Brainstorm ideas and evaluate.
• Test ideas and user journeys out on papers.
• Prototype, test, refine, and repeat with internal and
external users.

103

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“If you don’t have further questions, let’s keep moving,” I said.

Implementation Phase

•

Implement and deliver.

“The Design Thinking process is summarized for you all in the following slide,” said Hamda.

“Now, let’s get down to business and give more explanation to each
step,” Hamda said.
1. Understand the business problem and constraints. Here, you need
to develop a clear understanding of the problem you’re trying to
solve. This isn’t always as obvious as it seems. Here’s an example of
how Stanford Health Care (SHC) administrators incorporated
design thinking into planning the new Stanford Hospital in
2018. The SHC staff used design thinking to complete a plan to
104

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

redesign two nursing units in the current hospital to serve only
patients with cancer. “Patients and their families were involved
from the start,” said Helen Waters, a design and innovation
leader with Stanford Health Care. “We wanted to know what
they needed and what they felt was missing.”
The process included seven months of conducting interviews
and tabletop exercises and simulating actual work routines in
the proposed layouts of the nursing units to be redesigned.
2. Empathize with users’ problem and experience. Next, you need
to talk to and understand your target customers, appreciate
how they see the world, empathize with their life situations, and
experience and understand what they want, like, and engage
with.
“Sir, before we proceed further, what is the difference between empathize and sympathize?” Afra asked, while looking at me.
“That’s a good question,” I replied. “As Thomas J. Watson, IBM
founder, famously said,
“The ability to ask the right question is more than half the
battle of finding the answer.”
“Empathy is the ability to understand and share the feelings of
another. It is the act of putting yourself in others’ shoes and seeing a
problem from their point of view. Being empathetic towards someone
doesn’t mean that you are agreeing with them. It just means that you
understand their truth,” I answered.
“Ohh! That’s a one-million-dollar answer,” she said with a smile.
“By the way,” I continued, “we can see that empathy is one of the
five components of emotional intelligence. Empathy is the ability to
understand and share the feelings of another.”
“Here’s an example; you all must have ordered food from Uber
Eats, right? Do you know that they approach their food delivery service
with a design thinking mindset? One of the top officials from the
company explains how empathy is essential to their practice. In one
105

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

of his interviews, he mentioned that, ‘To understand all our different
markets and how our products fit into the physical conditions of
each city, we constantly immerse ourselves in the places where our
customers live, work, and eat. Sitting in our offices in San Francisco
or New York, we can’t truly understand the experiences of a person on
the streets of Bangkok or London.’”
“Wow, that is incredible,” Masud said.
“But mind you all, empathy doesn’t mean pleasing everybody. It’s
about the ability to read between the lines.”
“And sympathy?” Afra asked.
“By contrast, sympathy is a feeling of care and concern for someone, accompanied by a wish to see them better off or happier,” I said.
“I got it now,” Afra said.
“Let’s move to the rest of the list,” I said.
3. Understand what the organization can do – technologies and
capabilities. This involves exploring what the organization is
capable of doing well and what it won’t be able to do.
“So, here we’ve completed phase one of the journey—the inspiration
phase. Let’s move to phase two which is…”
I looked at the team for an answer.
“It’s the ideation phase,” Jose said.
“Bravo! Let’s keep moving,” I said.
“Hamda, can you tell me the difference between brainstorming
and ideation. Aren’t they the same?” May, the chief imagineering
officer, asked.
Hamda chuckled and replied, “Not at all. They are not the same
thing.”
May gasped.
“Brainstorming is a method for generating ideas to solve a problem. It usually involves a group, under the direction of a facilitator.
The strength of brainstorming is the potential participants have in
drawing associations between their ideas in a free-thinking environment, thereby broadening the solution space.

106

CONTENTS

CRItRAL Thinking

A reinvention of traditional brainstorming, Ideation is a technique
that involves both the left and right sides of the brain to allow breakthroughs from entrenched habits of thought and persistent difficult
problems. The process of Ideation begins with individual ideas, more
accountability, consensus building, and ultimate involvement with
participants ‘voting with their feet,’” Hamda answered in one breath.
4. Brainstorm ideas and evaluate. Having understood the context,
brainstorm ideas. Then evaluate them and select the most
promising ones.
5. Test ideas and user journeys out on paper. For promising ideas,
draft them on paper and put yourself into the mind of your
users. Think about what their experience will be, both with the
product you’re thinking of and with competing products.
6. Prototype, test, refine, and repeat with internal and external users.
Take the best ideas forward and build prototypes of them. Test
these with users and go through repeated cycles of refinement
until you are confident they would buy them.
7. Implement and deliver. Now take your best-received prototype
through to production.
As they say, “a little help goes a long way.” Hamda’s explanation
provided that “little help” to her office buddies. The nine champions
were thankful to me and confirmed their positive feelings about the
design thinking meeting.

107

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

STAGE

4

Execution
Doing Things Differently
“I have gone easy on you on the previous four stages of the model,”
I announced in a serious tone. “This one is very important. This is
where everyone engages and contributes their full intellectual capacity. It is the walk-the-talk phase. Execution is a critical stage of the
SEWA project model, as almost 80% of the work is carried out here.
So roll up your sleeves. Now it’s time to put the plan into action. In
short, it’s time to execute and not excuse.”
The team assumed alert sitting positions.
The chief flexitricity officer added, “Moreover, the execution plan
will serve as the main communication vehicle to ensure that everyone
is aware and cognizant of the project objectives and how they will be
accomplished.”
“Well said, Hassan,” I replied. “Let’s all give him a big round of
applause.”
The team golf clapped and murmured in appreciation of Hassan’s
prompt answer.
“You don’t have to golf clap here—let’s see some enthusiasm, folks!
This is do or die stage!” I replied.
“So, how do we navigate this important stage?” the chief imagineering officer asked.
Picking up the whiteboard marker, I swiftly moved towards the
board and wrote “project execution” in big bold fonts.

108

CONTENTS

Execution

“Let me explain,” I said tapping the board. “Project execution is
the fourth phase of the SEWA project management model and one
of the most vital of the project phases. It is the phase where we will
construct our deliverables and present them to our customers and key
stakeholders.”
I paused, breathed a big huff, and said, “This is usually the longest
phase of the project life cycle and predictably the most demanding.”
Their eyes opened wide.
“Oh, you have me worried now,” the chief FinTech officer commented in a grim tone.
“Now don’t worry your pretty little head about it. Just listen to
this,” I said. “Project execution’s key purpose is to complete the work
defined in the project management charter and to meet key project
objectives.”
Then, while writing on the board, I said, “Here are two principal
things a leader can influence when it comes to producing results:
1. Strategy (or plan) and,
2. Ability to execute that strategy.”
The team began to studiously take notes. I stepped back from the
board.

Watch Out
I gave them a couple of minutes to pen down the two main points that
I had written on the board.
Once they had put their pens back, Masud, the chief sustainalytics
officer, exclaimed, “Watch out everyone. We need to do all of these
things!”
Everyone raised their eyebrows.
Masud cleared his throat and said, “No doubt they are all good
things to do, but the more you try to do, the less energy you have to
give to any one thing.”
I said, “As we often say,
109

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“A lever must move a lot to move the rock a little.”

“Now, stop for a moment and ask yourself this question: Which of
these do you struggle with more? Is it creating a strategy or executing
the strategy?”
The team looked a bit agonized.
“I bet it’s creating strategy,” Ahmed Babiker, the chief culture
officer, opined.
“No way, strategy is a cakewalk, executing the strategy is the
infamously tough thing out there,” the chief efficienology officer
contradicted.
“What do you think, sir?” Syeda, the chief knowledge officer asked
in a soft tone.
“Every time I’ve posed this question to managers anywhere in the
world, their answer is immediate: ‘Execution!’ In fact, this is what one
of my friends had to say: ‘Once I’ve decided what to do, my biggest
challenge is in getting people to execute it at the level of excellence I
need.’”
The team listened in silence.
“But, then,” I said, “one of you may ask, ‘what’s revolutionary
about that?’” I smiled and added, “A question that has always teased
me is, why is execution so difficult? After all, if the strategy is clear,
and I as the leader am driving it, won’t the team naturally engage to
achieve it?”
They kept staring at me, expecting me to answer the aforementioned question.
I looked at the team and said, “Alas! The answer is ‘no.’”
“So what’s the common challenge?” the chief efficienology officer
queried. “How can we sidestep the execution phobia?”
I smiled and said, “Before I answer your question, I would like to
ask you all a child’s riddle.”
“Wow, I love to solve riddles!” Afra said in an excited tone.
“Here’s the riddle,” I said.
“Five frogs are sitting on a log. Four decide to jump off.
How many are left?”
110

CONTENTS

Execution

“Even a preschooler can answer this easily,” Afra responded. “Just subtract four from five. The answer is, one frog is left behind.”
“Answer: Five Why?
Because deciding and doing are not the same thing,”
I replied with a sly smile. “Executing a strategy requires a significant
change in human behavior—the behavior of many, or even all, of the
people in the team or the organization at large.”
I chuckled, and said, “In short, when you execute a strategy that
requires a lasting change in the behavior of other people, you are
facing one of the greatest leadership challenges you will ever face.
That’s the big secret. As every leader knows, getting the commitment
of hearts and minds, the kind of commitment that will endure in the
midst of the daily grind, is not easy. You can’t go for the fast buck, the
easy dollar.”
I continued in a loud tone, “To be successful, you will need
more than just compliance from people; you will need their love
and commitment.”
“I agree with you, sir,” the chief culture officer added. “Mostly,
leaders are controlled by philosophies that are shortsighted. They
don’t believe in striking a long-term committed relationship with their
employees.” He tapped Masud, the chief sustainalytics officer, on the
arm and said, “As goofy as it may sound, this is how most managers/
leaders function. They follow the classic herd mentality.”
I added, “That’s a thorny situation, a difficult one.”
“But there has to be a solution to this quandary,” the SHEngineering
officer pointed out.
“Then let’s all find out,” I said.

The Solution
“In a key study on organizational change,” I began, “the global management-consulting firm Bain & Company reports these findings:
about 65 percent of initiatives required significant behavioral change
on the part of front-line employees—something that managers often
111

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

fail to consider or plan for in advance. People follow people, not ideas,” I said in a heavy tone.
I continued, “It’s natural for a leader to assume the people are the
problem. After all, they are the ones not doing what we need to have
done. But you would be wrong. The people are not the problem!”
The chief flexitricity officer added, “I agree with you, sir, it is easy
for leaders to forget that leading is as much about inspiring the imagination and actions of the followers as it is about getting the direction
and strategy right.”
I smiled at him and said, “W. Edwards Deming, the father of the
quality movement, taught that any time the majority of the people
behave a particular way the majority of the time, then people are not
the problem. The problem is inherent in the system. As a leader, you
own responsibility for the system. Although a particular person can
be a big problem, if you find yourself blaming the people, you should
look again. And again.”
The team listened in silence.
“Sir, this reminds me of the no complaining policy that you introduced to us last year,” May said.
“Bravo, May!” I continued, “I have seen time and time again that
when leaders shift their perspective from the negative side of the
ledger to the positive side, it creates a positive chain reaction.”
Silence prevailed.
The chief knowledge officer broke the silence by asking, “How can
we apply this to solve the challenges in SEWA’s projects?”
I replied immediately, “You are about to have one of two reactions:
‘Oh, cool!’ or ‘Oh, no!’ But either way, there is nothing you can do
to change results; they are in the past. Only by learning what worked
and learning from the past can we be more effective in the present and
more creative in shaping future projects.”
“So, where do we begin?” the chief greenification officer asked.
The chief knowledge officer replied, “Well, my common sense says
that it will start by creating project schedules.”
“Bravo, good job!” I said. “And here’s how we can do it. In order
to develop our project schedules, we first need to define the activities,
112

CONTENTS

Execution

sequence them in the right order, estimate the resources needed, and
estimate the time it will take to complete the tasks. In short, create the
modus operandi of our projects.”
All of them started to take notes. They were vigorously noting each
and every word that I uttered. They were very committed.

Project Schedules
“If you remember,” I began, “project schedules grow out of the basic documents that initiate the project—the Project Charter, which
include start and end dates, budget information, and the scope statement.”
I continued, “As we all know, SEWA managers often cited that
failure to deliver projects on time was one of their biggest challenges.
Time has the least amount of flexibility; it passes no matter what
happens on a project. At SEWA, project schedule issues were the main
reasons for conflicts in projects, particularly during the second half of
their duration. Am I clear?” I asked.
“Yes, sir,” Syeda said.

Slice & Dice
“Now let me present to you all a new way to control and execute a
project. It’s Slice and Dice,” I said.
“Slice and Dice! What is slicing and dicing?” Masud asked.
“Slice and Dice refers to a strategy for segmenting, viewing, and
understanding data in a database. Users ‘slice and dice’ by cutting a
large segment of data into smaller digestible topics/parts and repeating this process until arriving at the right level of detail for analysis.
Slicing and dicing information helped us to further analyze the business, thereby enabling us to get the results we need. Furthermore, the
method presents data in new and diverse perspectives. In summary,
since I prefer being data-driven as well as data-informed, this process
has proven effective,” I said. “This method entails dividing a quantity

113

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

of information into smaller parts to analyze it more closely or in
different ways. Oh, I remember what W. Edwards Deming said once:
“In GOD we trust. All others bring data.”
“SEWA’s mega projects equated mega challenges. Hence, I focused
on breaking them down into several mini projects using the Slice and
Dice method,” I said.
“I am sure this method is going to be a good one in controlling our
projects,” Moza said.
“Also, slicing and dicing helps me to select the activities I believe
will have the greatest impact on achieving my project goals. In the
words of consultant and entrepreneur Richard Koch, in business,
“The mass of activity will always be pointless, poorly conceived, badly directed, wastefully executed, and largely beside
the point. A small portion of activity will always be terrifically effective….it is probably not what you think it is; it is
opaque and buried within a basket of less effective activity.”

The 80/20 Principle
Then, I stood up to speak to the group. “Well, all the aforementioned
tools are effective in one way or another, but I love to follow a magical
management tool. It’s called the 80/20 principle.”
“Really! It does sound a big deal,” Ghada remarked.
“In 1897, Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto discovered the 80/20
principle. The underlying pattern of his principle asserts that there
is an inbuilt imbalance between causes and results, inputs and
outputs, and efforts and rewards. The 80/20 relationship provides a
good benchmark for this imbalance. A typical pattern will indicate
that 80 percent of outputs result from 20 percent of inputs. Also,
eighty percent of consequences flow from 20 percent of causes, while
80 percent of results/rewards come from 20 percent of efforts. In
business, many examples of the 80/20 principle have been validated:

114

CONTENTS

Execution

20 percent of products usually account for usually 80 percent of sales;
so do 20 percent of customers,” I said.
“That’s fascinating!” Syeda exclaimed.
“This philosophy entices me because I want to both multiply
SEWA’s project profitability and effectiveness while raising quality
and trimming costs,” I said in an excited tone. “Here, look at the
screen to understand this timeless concept,” I concluded.

115

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Swiss Cheese Method
“Apart from Slice and Dice, you may also adopt the Swiss Cheese
Method to overcome any mammoth-size task that you’ve been shelving on the back burner.”
“Wait a moment! Did we hear Swiss cheese? Swiss cheese is my
favorite topping on any pizza.”
“Yes, you heard it right,” I replied. “This bit is quite interesting.
So listen up everyone,” I continued. “Brian Tracy discusses the Swiss
Cheese Method in his book Eat that Frog! This is the ultimate go-to
technique if you have humongous tasks lying undone and you’ve been
procrastinating for a long while.”
“Please tell us more,” Fatima, chief SHEngineering officer pleaded.
I smiled and replied, “The author states that we can use this technique to get ourselves into gear by resolving to punch a hole in the
task, like a hole in a block of Swiss cheese.”
“And how does it help?” Fatima asked.
“In doing so, you ‘Swiss cheese’ a task when you resolve to work for
a specific time period on it.”
“How long?” Syeda asked.
I said, “Well, it may be as little as five or ten minutes, after which
you will stop and do something else.”
“Wow, I am going to put the ‘Swiss cheese’ technique into action
immediately to get started on the large, complex, multitask job that
I’ve been putting off.”
“Sounds like a great plan. Do let us know how you fare on it,”
Hassan exhorted.
“Very well, then, team, now moving onto the next slide. And it’s
about timeboxing.”

Timeboxing
“Has anyone ever come across the term ‘timeboxing’?” I asked.
No one had, except Hassan, who raised both hands.
Everyone shot him a skeptical look.
116

CONTENTS

Execution

“By the way, your colleague Hassan is a master of this tool,” I said.
“What? I’ve never heard of that sport. I’ve only heard of and
watched kickboxing!” the chief sustainalytics officer said.
“Well, it’s far from kickboxing. Timeboxing is a time management
tool used in agile project management,” the chief flexitricity officer
answered with glee.
“Wow, tell us more. It sounds interesting,” the SHEngineering
officer requested.
Hassan continued, “Here, you break down projects or daily tasks
into set periods of time, which allows you to accomplish more than
you would with a less organized schedule.”
“Okay, so where does the term ‘timebox’ come from?” the chief
imagineering officer inquired.
Hassan added, “To use this time management tool, you allocate a
certain number of hours or days, called a ‘timebox,’ to each activity.
You then use this time – and only this time – to complete the task.
In this way, you give all of our tasks equal attention by allocating a
certain amount of time to each.”
The chief culture officer responded, “What an amazing tool. Timeboxing seems to be a simple and effective way to manage our own,
and our team members’, daily workload. For ourselves, this ensures
that we don’t spend too long on a task that isn’t worth the effort. For
team members, it will help to ensure that they don’t over-engineer
solutions, and that they don’t unintentionally blow the budget we
have available for the work.”
“But can you tell us how to use timeboxing to schedule our day?”
the chief FinTech officer asked.
Hassan replied, “Sure, it’s not rocket science. First, we need to estimate how long each item on our to-do list or action program should
take to complete and allocate a set amount of time to each one.” He
paused, then said, “Also, don’t forget to include breaks and build in
contingency time for unexpected requests or interruptions.”
“Then?” May, the chief imagineering officer inquired.
“Then set a timer on your smartphone or computer to alert you to
when you should move on to your next timebox.”
117

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“What should be the length of a timebox?” Ahmed Babiker, the
chief culture officer, asked.
Hassan answered, “Choose the length of time that works best for
you. Usually 25 minutes, followed by a short break. You might want
to skip these rest periods if you’re absorbed in a task, but try to avoid
doing this too often, because they allow you to return to your work
with more energy and enthusiasm.”
Everyone was engrossed in taking notes.
“And last but not least, make sure that you analyze what you’ve
accomplished and review your progress at the end of each timebox.
Ask yourself the following: did you complete your work? If not, why
not? How will you schedule your tasks differently next time?”
“Thank you, Hassan, for sharing this important tool with us,” I
said.
“It’s my pleasure, sir,” he replied.
“Timeboxing is definitely a great tool. However, I won’t be surprised if I hear time-wrestling soon,” Masud, the chief sustainalytics
officer, said giggling.
Everyone laughed and nodded.

Smart Meetings
“You may ask, why do we need smart meetings? My answer is this.
Based on previous projects handling in SEWA, the following are two
important facts about SEWA project communication; we sent 70
emails per day and conducted over 50 meetings per month.”
“Shocking! I wasn’t expecting it to be that much,” Hassan said.

No Pointless Meetings
“It’s a fact that meetings are a serious drain on an organization’s time
and resources. A 2018 study conducted by Quartz at Work found that
meetings can consume up to 17% of the workweek and an estimated
$37 billion per year. I used to bulletproof my project meetings by
creating a unique process. The European Business Review article laid
118

CONTENTS

Execution

out the magical 4Ps model of effective meetings. I was so moved by it
that I adopted it in my project meetings. It demonstrated immediate
benefits and streamlined most of my day’s meetings.
“Dear team, whenever you are about to engage in meetings, or
any form of teamwork, it pays to set out the 4Ps model of effective
meetings, which I am highlighting in the following slide. Stay tuned,”
I said.

“Let me explain in more depth about the model. Just pay attention,” I said.
Person (Who is running the meeting and who needs to be involved?)
The job for the “Person” is to clarify who needs to be involved in
each part of the agenda. In SEWA’s case, the “Person” is not necessarily the agenda owner, team leader, or even the subject expert, just
someone who is good at keeping focused will do the job.

119

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Purpose (What are the clearly defined reasons for working on each
issue?)
The “Purpose” question provides a strategic analysis of what you
need to be working on, at the team level, in order to achieve your
business plan. It is a relevance check and helps to maintain a balance
in teamwork. For us, asking “why” helped to bring clarity, priority,
and a sense of ownership into the meetings, which was heavily lacking
in SEWA projects.
Process (What teamwork process will we use?)
The “Process” is linked with the “Purpose.” In fact, the process
you use to achieve your purpose will be driven by the nature of the
purpose. To tease it out, you ask a simpler question, “Is your purpose
more strategic or more operational? Are you looking to set or refine
direction (strategic) or report on progress or deviations against plan
(operational)?
“I really like this piece of the model. Certainly I’m going to use it,”
Afra said.
“Great! Let me explain the last P,” I commented.
Product (What do we expect to achieve?)
The final P, and in many ways the most important one, is having
“the end in mind.” If the “Purpose” is at the strategic level (the “why”)
but the “Product” is at the operational level (the “what”), you won’t
achieve a thing. Specifying the “Product” at the start of the meeting
helps us to arrive at a clear destination.
“Team, I am done here. Yet following the above 4Ps will lead us to
better result-oriented and shorter meetings. To put it into practice, we
need to put up wallpaper of 4Ps in all our project meeting rooms to
serve as reminders,” I said.
“It will save us enough time, energy, morale, and oxygen to focus
on other priorities,” Masud said.
“Bravo, sir, well explained,” the chief design thinking officer said.

120

CONTENTS

Execution

Making Every Meeting Matter
“I am aware of the fact that the human brain isn’t meant to process
so many disparate topics in one sitting. There needs to be greater
clarity and focus, which means that there needs to be different kinds
of meetings for different kinds of issues. And yes, that means there
would be more meetings, not fewer,” I explained.
“Oh, seriously?” said Moza, the chief restructuring officer asked.
“Yes, be ready!” I said.
Looking at the team, I said, “My last summer holiday in the US,
while waiting for my aircraft at the J.F. Kennedy International Airport,
New York, to go to Los Angeles, I happened to see a bookstore. Since
I had some time before boarding, I strolled into the bookstore and my
eyes fell upon an interesting book.”
“Which book was it, sir?” Moza asked.
“The Advantage, written by Patrick Lencioni. According to him,
there are four basic types of meetings. For ease of reading, I have
recreated an infographic of it. Look at the screen,” I said.

Tactical/Weekly

Daily Check-in

45-90 minutes
Goals, Standard operating
objectives

10 minutes
Schedules, Events,
Issue alerts

Strategic/Adhoc Topical

Meetings

2-4 hours
Dig into the critical issues

Developmental /Quarterly
1-2 days
Review the organization’s
strategic anchors

121

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Looks cool. I like it!” the chief design thinking officer exclaimed.
“Thank you. Let’s have a close look at each meeting,” I responded
with a smile.
“We already are,” Ghada said.
1. Administrative (Daily Check-in)
Essentially this is about the team getting into the habit of gathering once a day, for no more than ten minutes, to clear the air
about anything administrative that would be helpful to know.
Schedules, events, and alerts, that kind of stuff.
2. Tactical (Weekly Staff Meetings)
This kind of meeting is about having a real-time agenda—this
entails creating a one-page scorecard or chart—that includes
the thematic goal, defining objectives, and their standard operating objectives. This type of meeting can consume 45–90
minutes in totality.
3. Strategic (Adhoc Topical)
This is the most interesting and compelling of all meetings. The
purpose of this kind of meeting is to dig into the critical issues
that can have a long-term impact on the organization—any
issue that warrants more time, energy, and preparation. As for
the timing of topical meetings, it is okay to spend two to four
hours at one go. No one is going to complain about spending
too much time discussing critical issues.
4. Developmental (Quarterly Off-site Reviews)
This meeting is about stepping back from the business to get a
fresh perspective, which is why it is done away from the office.
Activities that should be addressed during these meetings include
reviewing the organization’s strategic anchors and thematic
goals, assessing the performance of key employees, discussing
competitive threats, etc. The timing of these meetings is not
really negotiable; usually they may last up to one or two days.

122

CONTENTS

Execution

“Oh, reminds me of our coffice, (coffee outside the office), when you
made it a must for all the leaders, for hanging out related to work
issues, challenges, and opportunities,” Jose said.

123

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

STAGE

5

Knowledge capture
and storage

When it comes to project storing and sharing the lessons learned
before, during, and after, it is essential that these records be stored in
a safe place in the organization for future reference. This what we call
at SEWA knowledge management (KM).
“What is SEWA KMS?” asked Afra.
I answered, “KMS stands for knowledge management System. In
fact, KM emerged from the world of academia and became a burning
issue for business leaders. Practically, KMS involves identifying and
mapping an organization’s intellectual assets, generating new knowledge, making the knowledge available to everyone, sharing best practices, and using technology to assist it. SEWA is in dire need of a
KMS, primarily because we want to foster continuous improvement,
ensure 24/7 access to information, improve productivity, create an
innovative learning organization by linking knowledge, and create
sustainability by promoting organizational communication.”
“That’s a pretty long list!” Moza said.
I said, “To ensure that SEWA KMS is real, effective, and not merely
symbolic, I have created the SEWA knowledge management model to
support our project management department.”
My office manager Omar requested my team to assemble in the
Knowledge X room, as I wanted to wrap the model session in that
room.

124

CONTENTS

Knowledge capture and storage

Knowledge X Room
Knowledge X is the room where sharing tacit knowledge takes place—
the knowledge that employees acquire through their work experiences, successes, and challenges in SEWA. The English letter “X” also
denotes the multiplication symbol of math. At SEWA, our ultimate
objective is to become a continuous innovative learning organization.
The main purpose of the Knowledge X room is to connect employees
(in any field or discipline) with each other so they can discuss their
work, learn from one another, and achieve improvements in results.
Sharing knowledge, especially experiential knowledge, is a key ingredient in innovation. Knowledge exchange is essential to achieve continual learning from experience and apply that learning to improve
our work.
“This stage is the last, as well as one of the most important stages,
of the SEWA project management model – the final project documentation. In essence, it is the closeout stage of SEWA’s projects; that
is, the stage of wrapping things up and handing over the ownership to
others in the organization or stakeholders,” I said.
The closeout document answers three important questions:
1. What should we keep doing?
2. What should we stop doing?
3. What should we start doing?
“Ladies and gentlemen, the answers are going to be vital, and simply jotting them down on a piece of paper would not be justifiable.
The immense knowledge deserves to be archived so that it can later be
pulled out of the archived library/system and put to use. After all, we
cannot anticipate the value someone else will find in our knowledge,
can we? In light of this, we need a comprehensive and systematic documentation system,” I said.
“I love studying knowledge management and the ways knowledge
can be shared and transferred across the globe,” Fatima, the chief
SHEngineering officer, said.
125

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“I would like to direct you all to NASA’s chief knowledge officer’s
website. You can benchmark and download a couple of interesting
publications pertaining to our pressing need. The NASA knowledge
journal may give you a great head start, while the NASA knowledge
toolbox contains tools, resources, and information for individuals and
teams to enhance their knowledge-sharing efforts on real-life projects
and programs,” I said.

SEWA Knowledge Management System
“Now let me invite you to a short journey under the theme ‘The
SEWA Six Pillars of knowledge management.’ But before that, let me
share with you what Peter Drucker asserts:
“The most important contribution management needs to
make in the 21st century is to increase the productivity of
knowledge work and knowledge worker.”
“And this takes us to the first step of our journey. Let me explain
it to you all. The SEWA project management model is expected to
reap huge benefits, and a wealth of information will be gained from
managing our projects leading us to create a good KM model. Look
up and behold our bespoke SEWA knowledge management model
pillars,” I added.
Knowledge Architects

Interested
People

Leadingship

126

CONTENTS

Knowledge capture and storage

Below is a brief summary of the six pillars:
1. Document: To conduct lessons-learned studies to examine what
went well and what didn’t. Through this type of analysis, the
wisdom of experience is transferred back to the project organization, which, in turn, will help future project teams in improving their performance.
2. Champions: Champions encompass talented employees with a
focused vision and the aptitude to align knowledge management
with business tactics, ushering strong and dedicated leadership
to SEWA. SEWA KM champions play an instrumental role in
managing the efficient functioning of the SEWA knowledge
toolbox.
3. Promoters: The promoters develop, promote, and facilitate organizational knowledge while they also create, collaborate, and
align the operational processes and SEWA strategy with the
KM framework.
4. Technology: Technology is the main tool that will leverage
the SEWA KM framework. All technical solutions will add
value to our processes, while the lack of them contribute to
failure. Knowing this, it is clear to see that technology is clearly
fundamental and that having the latest machines and programs
is a must.
5. Learning: The best tools and strategies could fall flat if the
desire to learn and acquire knowledge is missing. Learning is
a never-ending process here at SEWA, and I have emphasized
the importance of education by making it an important pillar
of SEWA’s KM.
“Whoa, wait a moment! Didn’t we celebrate ‘Learning at Work Week’
this year?” Fatima, the chief SHEngineering officer, asked.
“Yes, you got it on point,” Syeda, the chief knowledge officer,
replied.
“I don’t remember hearing about anything of the sort. Did I miss
it?” Hassan, the chief flexitricity officer, asked.
127

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

The rest of the team gasped.
“Oh, I know, I was on my annual vacation during that time,”
Hassan chuckled, embarrassed.
“Syeda, why don’t you share with all of us here the interesting story
of SEWA’s ‘Learning at Work Week’ celebration?” I smiled and signalled at her.
“Thank you, sir. SEWA marked ‘Learning at Work Week’ with
creative, vibrant, and engaging campaigns and activities that inspired
our colleagues to learn through life and promote learning cultures at
work,” said Syeda.
“Did we have any specific theme?” Ghada, the chief greenification
officer inquired.
Syeda responded, “The national theme for ‘Learning at Work Week
2019’ was ‘Shaping the Future.’ We collaborated with the ‘Campaign
for Learning’ that provided resources, activity ideas, promotional
materials, and workshops to help us design a brilliant ‘Learning at
Work Week’ at SEWA and bring the theme to life. In fact, we will be
celebrating ‘Learning at Work Week’ in 2020 from May 18th to May
24th,” she added.
“Wow, count us all in, Syeda!” the rest of the project team unanimously.
“Sure thing!” Syeda responded with glee.
I was amused with the spirit of my team. “Now, let’s move on
to the most important pillar of SEWA knowledge management,” I
announced.
The team looked at me with excitement.
“Really, what is it?” Fatima asked.
“Well, the answer lies in one of my well-known quotes,” I said.
“Of course! I know with certainty which famous quote you are
talking about,” Kumar, the chief design-thinking officer exclaimed,
“which you keep saying from time to time:
“Knowledge is power, if applied and shared.”
“You are correct,” I said.
I continued, “Hence, the sixth pillar is ‘sharing.’ Let’s discover it
together.”
128

CONTENTS

Knowledge capture and storage

6. Sharing: Knowledge should be free flowing. Hindering knowledge from being shared with each other is detrimental to any
organization. In light of this, I consider knowledge as wealth,
which multiplies when shared and collaborated. The more you
give, the more you get back.
“Short and sweet,” Fatima said.
I looked at the team and said out loud, “Your knowledge and experience is worth a million only if you share it with the world. Knowledge begets knowledge.”
They nodded in agreement.

The Safeguards
To further safeguard our SEWA knowledge management model, three
safeguards are needed:
1. Leadingship
2. Knowledge Architects
3. Interested People
“Leadingship! Did I hear that right? Sir, do you mean leadership?”
asked May.
“Let me explain one-by-one,” I said.
1. Leadingship
“Is a vital element. It forms the solid base upon which the six pillars
stand. Leadingship is about leading the interested people towards the
true north in order to realize the common shared vision. Leadingship
means authenticity and passion in charge. This will help pull us into a
new and very exciting direction,” I said.
2. Knowledge Architects
I continued, “On the other hand, there are also good people around
who like to create a difference and beautify the SEWA KM framework; we give the term Knowledge Architects to such individuals.
129

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

Knowledge Architects are important because they help the organization adapt and swiftly reconfigure the internal processes and resources
to meet new challenges. SEWA knowledge architects are responsible
for the implementation of SEWA knowledge management and help
to identify, organize, and provide access to the information when
needed.”
The team listened in pin-drop silence.
“Next, we need ‘interested people,’” I said.
3. Interested people
“Success can be only be achieved if all the members of the project
team give their best. Interested people are the essential element of
pursuit here in SEWA. If genuine interest is missing, we should bid
goodbye to the employee right at the beginning,” I added.
May raised her hand and said, “You are absolutely right, sir. I remember you wrote in depth in of your books about the energy vampires.
Could you tell us more about them?”
“Ohh, gosh. I wrote about energy vampires in the SEWA Brand
Turnaround and Rejuvenation. Interestingly, the emotional vampires
aren’t the mythical characters from the famous American series The
Vampire Diaries. I am talking about living human beings who suck all
the positive energy out of us to fuel their relentless hunger for negativity, leaving us drained, exhausted, and unhappy. These are the authentic predatory, mind-clouding, shape-shifting creatures of darkness.
Whatever you call them, emotional/energy vampires, energy suckers,
or toxic people, they can wreak havoc on your life and projects if you
don’t have effective strategies to deal with them. The reason we need
interested people is because we inevitably encounter emotional vampires in life,” I said.
“Thank you, sir, for bringing this up. We couldn’t agree more,”
Ghada said in a solemn tone.
“I am done here!” I said with a smile.

130

CONTENTS

The Way Forward

“It was an impressive presentation!” the whole team said loudly.
“Let me give you some perspective here. Remember what Thomas
Henry said once:
‘The great end of life is not knowledge, but action.’”
“Oh, this is what is called ‘intellectual capital,’” Hassan said excitedly.
We moved on to chat about SEWA’s current project updates. I
advised my HR manager to begin with a crash workshop on the SEWA
project management model. I knew that if this model was ‘draggedand-dropped’ in the project team’s mind, then we could go sky-high.
“Thank you, sir, without your wise counsel and intellectual and
insightful explanation of the SEWA project management model,
I wonder where we would be,” Syeda, the chief knowledge officer,
added.
“The SEWA project management model will surely make a world
of difference in SEWA’s projects,” Afra, the chief efficienology officer,
confirmed.
“Thank you very much, sir, for this amazing and informative presentation. There’s a lot to take home today. We are fortunate to be
handpicked by you as the core project leadership team and to learn
the tricks of the trade to execute SEWA’s projects using your SEWA
project management model,” Syeda said.
“Thank you so much. Indeed, I feel like I have hit the jackpot. Each
and every slide had words of wisdom,” Ahmed Babiker responded.
“However, you will be coming back soon with a longer presentation. Won’t you, sir?” Syeda said with a chuckle.

131

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

“Is there another presentation coming up soon? What’s it all
about?” Ghada, the chief greenification officer, asked.
“Well, let me reveal a part of the secret, not the full secret,” I said
with a bright smile on my face. “Soon, we will be launching our
SEWA Vision 2025. To know the rest of the news,” I added, “you will
have to wait till our 6th Sharjah Energy Meet, which will be held on
Wednesday, January 8, 2020.”
“As I wrap up the presentation today,” I concluded, “on December
31, 2019, and as we embark on the New Year today, I would like to
extend my best wishes to all of you with greater success than ever
before.”

132

CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

As Toni Morrison famously stated, “If there’s a book that you want to
read, but it hasn’t been written yet, then you must write it.”
The book you hold in your hands is the kind of book I always
wanted to read but couldn’t find. So, I decided to pen it myself. However, as they say, it takes two flints to make a fire. This book would
not have seen the light of the day without the fantastic people I will
mention on this page. Here, I would like to thank a few of the many
people who directly or indirectly helped me conceptualize this work. I
would like to thank the great heroes and outperformers of SEWA for
supporting the idea of this book from day one.
Additionally, it is a great pleasure to thank my chief knowledge officer, Syeda, whose wisdom, insights, encouragement, and hard work
have truly enriched the book. Special mention also goes to Kumar,
head of design, for his creative input.
I would like to give special thanks to my family, who have been so
supportive and encouraging in many ways, not only by offering specific ideas regarding this book but also, more importantly, by creating
a foundational and loving environment for joyful living.
There is a Malayalam proverb that says, “One can pay back the
loan of gold, but one dies forever in debt to those who are kind.”
I am forever indebted to all those mentioned above.

133

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

About the Author

Dr. Rashid Alleem is ranked third among the 25 most influential
CEOs in GCC and is considered one of the 100 most influential
CEOs in the Middle East. Recently, the Academic College of Oxford, United Kingdom, honored Dr. Rashid Alleem with the title of
“Honorary Professor” in recognition of his scientific, administrative
and humanitatrian efforts, and contributions, especially in the field of
sustainable development. He is a passionate writer; an environmentalist; a sought-after thought leader; the creator of CRItRAL Thinking, a unique blend of “critical and lateral” thinking; and an internationally respected transformational leader. The founder of Alleem
Knowledge Center, Dr. Alleem is a dynamic leader who has worked
with prestigious governmental, semi-governmental, and nonprofit organizations. He is an entrepreneur par excellence with a flair for effective, strategic decision-making by means of innovative thinking. Dr.
Rashid was recognized as “The Knowledge Ambassador of the UAE”
by His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum—the
Vice President and Prime Minister of the UAE and ruler of the Emirate of Dubai—and as “Environmentalist of the Year 2012” by the
fourth Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir Bin Mohamad.
Dr. Alleem earned a Ph.D. from the University of Salford, in
Manchester, UK. Being a “sustainovationalist,” he has received five
honorary doctorates from different universities: Atlantic International
University (USA), in recognition of his achievements in the socioeconomic fields; Somalia National University, for his humanitarian services; American Global International University (USA), for his global
business contributions and numerous academic achievements; Indian
Peace University, from which he received a Doctorate in Philosophy
for his exceptional contributions, dedication, and social services to
society; and Doctor of Philosophy (D. Phil) from Amity University,
in recognition of his exceptional vision, deep commitment to the en134

CONTENTS

vironment, professionalism and direction in the pursuit of excellence;
his strategic vision and inspirational leadership in steering his organization towards continuous growth and dedication to the good of
humanity.
Dr. Alleem was recently recognized as The Global Green Ambassador by DMG. Under his leadership, SEWA received the Voluntary
Cancellation Certificate for excellence in energy-saving and the reduction of CO2 emissions by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2017. He was bestowed with
the Friend of Singapore Sustainability Award 2017 by the government
of Singapore, and he became a member of the advisory board of the
Singapore World Water Council. He has received the prestigious title
of “The Ambassador of Peace & Happiness in the Arab World” by
Voice of Kerala (VOK) Radio Station.
As a highly sought-after keynote speaker, presenter, and teacher,
Dr. Alleem is well-known for delivering compelling and practical messages to audiences of more than 200,000 people per annum, including at some of the largest regional and international venues.
Last but not least, he is one of the most interviewed and published
charismatic media personalities in the region. A prolific writer both in
English and Arabic, Dr. Rashid Alleem is the author of several books
on management and leadership. His newest book, The SEWA Way,
showcases 15 winning principles, providing a roadmap for achieving success both on an organizational and a personal scale. Aiming
to improve social, economic, and environmental living conditions
worldwide and helping to improve the quality of life for hundreds
of millions who have not yet seen the benefits of sustainable development and inclusive growth, he has written four books on the topic
of sustainability: My Green Journey in Hamriyah; Sustainability: The
Fourth Wave of Economy; I Am Committed: 17 Global Goals; and Alleem Sustainable Development Goals.
Contact Dr. Rashid Alleem at
rashid@alleem.com
www.alleemsdg.com
alleemsdgcom
135

CONTENTS

The SEWA Project Management Model

136

CONTENTS

